<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Verses on Various Occasions</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="solitude" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Solitude</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>There</strong> is in stillness oft a magic power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To calm the breast, when struggling passions lower;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touch’d by its influence, in the soul arise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Diviner feelings, kindred with the skies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By this the Arab’s kindling thoughts expand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When circling skies inclose the desert sand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this the hermit seeks the thickest grove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To catch th’ inspiring glow of heavenly love.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is not solely in the freedom given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To purify and fix the heart on heaven;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is a Spirit singing aye in air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That lifts us high above all mortal care.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No mortal measure swells that mystic sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No mortal minstrel breathes such tones around⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Angels’ hymn⁠—the sovereign harmony</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That guides the rolling orbs along the sky⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hence perchance the tales of saints who view’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And heard Angelic choirs in solitude.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By most unheard⁠—because the earthly din</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of toil or mirth has charms their ears to win.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas for man! he knows not of the bliss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heaven that brightens such a life as this.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Oxford</em>. <time datetime="1818"><em>Michaelmas Term</em>, 1818.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="my-birthday" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">My Birthday</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="my-birthday-1" epub:type="division">
				<p>
					<span><strong>Let</strong> the sun summon all his beams to hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bright pageant in his court, the cloud-paved sky</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Earth trim her fields and leaf her copses cold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till the dull month with summer-splendours vie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It is my Birthday;⁠—and I fain would try,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Albeit in rude, in heartfelt strains to praise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My God, for He hath shielded wondrously</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From harm and envious error all my ways,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And purged my misty sight, and fixed on heaven my gaze.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="my-birthday-2" epub:type="division">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal">2.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Not in that mood, in which the insensate crowd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of wealthy folly hail their natal day⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With riot throng, and feast, and greetings loud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Chasing all thoughts of God and heaven away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Poor insect! feebly daring, madly gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What! joy because the fulness of the year</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Marks thee for greedy death a riper prey?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is not the silence of the grave too near?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Viewest thou the end with glee, meet scene for harrowing fear?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="my-birthday-3" epub:type="division">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal">3.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Go then, infatuate! where the festive hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The curious board, the oblivious wine invite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speed with obsequious haste at Pleasure’s call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with thy revels scare the far-spent night.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Joy thee, that clearer dawn upon thy sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gates of death;⁠—and pride thee in thy sum</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of guilty years, and thy increasing white</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of locks; in age untimely frolicksome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make much of thy brief span, few years are yet to come!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="my-birthday-4" epub:type="division">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal">4.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Yet wiser such, than he whom blank despair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fostered grief’s ungainful toil enslave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lodged in whose furrowed brow thrives fretful care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sour graft of blighted hope; who, when the wave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of evil rushes, yields⁠—yet claims to rave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At his own deed, as the stern will of heaven.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In sooth against his Maker idly brave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom e’en the creature-world has tossed and driven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cursing the life he mars, “a boon so kindly given.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="my-birthday-5" epub:type="division">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal">5.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He dreams of mischief; and that brainborn ill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Man’s open face bears in his jealous view.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fain would he fly his doom; that doom is still</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His own black thoughts, and they must aye pursue.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Too proud for merriment, or the pure dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soft glistening on the sympathising cheek;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As some dark, lonely, evil-natured yew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose poisonous fruit⁠—so fabling poets speak⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath the moon’s pale gleam the midnight hag doth seek.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="my-birthday-6" epub:type="division">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal">6.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>No! give to me, Great Lord, the constant soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor fooled by pleasure nor enslaved by care;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each rebel-passion (for Thou canst) controul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And make me know the tempter’s every snare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What, though alone my sober hours I wear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No friend in view, and sadness o’er my mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throws her dark veil?⁠—Thou but accord this prayer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I will bless Thee for my birth, and find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That stillness breathes sweet tones, and solitude is kind.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="my-birthday-7" epub:type="division">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal">7.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Each coming year, O grant it to refine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All purer motions of this anxious breast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kindle the steadfast flame of love divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And comfort me with holier thoughts possest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till this worn body slowly sink to rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This feeble spirit to the sky aspire⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As some long-prisoned dove toward her nest⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There to receive the gracious full-toned lyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bowed low before the Throne ’mid the bright seraph choir.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Oxford</em>. <time datetime="1819-02-21"><em>February</em> 21, 1819.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="paraphrase-of-isaiah-64" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Paraphrase of Isaiah, Chap. LXIV</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>O <strong>that</strong> Thou wouldest rend the breadth of sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That veils Thy presence from the sons of men!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O that, as erst Thou camest from on high</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sudden in strength, Thou so would’st come again!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Track’d out by judgments was Thy fiery path,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ocean and mountain withering in Thy wrath!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then would Thy name⁠—the Just, the Merciful⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Strange dubious attributes to human mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Appal Thy foes; and, kings, who spurn Thy rule,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then, then would quake to hopeless doom consign’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See, the stout bows, and totters the secure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While pleasure’s bondsman hides his head impure!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come down! for then shall from its seven bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him who thirsts the draught of life be given;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eye hath not seen, ear hath not heard the things</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which He hath purposed for the heirs of heaven⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A God of love, guiding with gracious ray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each meek rejoicing pilgrim on his way.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yea, though we err, and Thine averted face</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rebukes the folly in Thine Israel done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will not that hour of chastisement give place</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To beams, the pledge of an eternal sun?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yes! for His counsels to the end endure;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We shall be saved, our rest abideth sure.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lord, Lord! our sins⁠ ⁠… our sins⁠ ⁠… unclean are we,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gross and corrupt; our seeming-virtuous deeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are but abominate; all, dead to Thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shrivel, like leaves when summer’s green recedes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While, like the autumn blast, our lusts arise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sweep their prey where the fell serpent lies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>None, there is none to plead with God in prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bracing his laggart spirit to the work</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of intercession; conscience-sprung despair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sin-loving still, doth in each bosom lurk.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guilt calls Thee to avenge;⁠—Thy risen ire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sears like a brand, we gaze and we expire.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But now, O Lord, our Father! we are Thine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Design and fashion; senseless while we lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou, as the potter, with a Hand Divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Didst mould Thy vessels of the sluggish clay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mark not our guilt, Thy word of wrath recall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo, we are Thine by price, Thy people all!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Alas for Zion! ’tis a waste;⁠—the fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The holy place in flames;⁠—where once our sires</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kindled the sacrifice of praise and prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Far other brightness gleams from Gentile fires.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Low lies our pride;⁠—and wilt Thou self-deny</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy rescuing arm unvex’d amid thine Israel’s cry?</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Brighton</em>. <time datetime="1821-09"><em>September</em>, 1821.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="to-fwn" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">To <abbr class="name">F. W. N.</abbr></h3>
				<h4 epub:type="subtitle">A Birthday Offering</h4>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Dear</strong> Frank, this morn has usher’d in</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The manhood of thy days;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A boy no more, thou must begin</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To choose thy future ways;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To brace thy arm, and nerve thy heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For maintenance of a noble part.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thou a voucher fair hast given,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of what thou wilt achieve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere age has dimm’d thy sun-lit heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In weary life’s chill eve;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should Sovereign Wisdom in its grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vouchsafe to thee so long a race.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>My brother, we are link’d with chain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That time shall ne’er destroy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Together we have been in pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Together now in joy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For duly I to share may claim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The present brightness of thy name,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>My brother, ’tis no recent tie</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Which binds our fates in one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>E’en from our tender infancy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The twisted thread was spun;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her deed, who stored in her fond mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our forms, by sacred love enshrined.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In her affection all had share,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">All six, she loved them all;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet on her early-chosen Pair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Did her full favour fall;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2" id="noteref-2" epub:type="noteref">2</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we became her dearest theme,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her waking thought, her nightly dream.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah! brother, shall we e’er forget</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Her love, her care, her zeal?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We cannot pay the countless debt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">But we must ever feel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For through her earnestness were shed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prayer-purchased blessings on our head.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Though in the end of days she stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And pain and weakness came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her force of thought was unsubdued,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Her fire of love the same;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And e’en when memory fail’d its part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We still kept lodgment in her heart.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And when her Maker from the thrall</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of flesh her spirit freed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No suffering companied the call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">—In mercy ’twas decreed⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One moment here, the next she trod</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The viewless mansion of her God.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now then at length she is at rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And, after many a woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rejoices in that Saviour blest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Who was her hope below;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kept till the day when He shall own</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His saints before His Father’s throne.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So it is left for us to prove</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Her prayers were not in vain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that God’s grace-according love</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Has come as gentle rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, falling in the vernal hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tints the young leaf, perfumes the flower.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Dear Frank, we both are summon’d now</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">As champions of the Lord;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enroll’d am I, and shortly thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Must buckle on thy sword;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A high employ, nor lightly given,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To serve as messengers of heaven!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Deep in my heart that gift I hide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">I change it not away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For patriot-warrior’s hour of pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Or statesman’s tranquil sway;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For poet’s fire, or pleader’s skill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pierce the soul and tame the will.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O! may we follow undismay’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Where’er our God shall call!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And may His Spirit’s present aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Uphold us lest we fall!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till in the end of days we stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As victors in a deathless land.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Chiswick</em>. <time datetime="1826-06-27"><em>June</em> 27, 1826.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="nature-and-art" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Nature and Art</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="subtitle">For an Album</h4>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>“<strong>Man</strong> goeth forth”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3" id="noteref-3" epub:type="noteref">3</a> with reckless trust</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Upon his wealth of mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if in self a thing of dust</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Creative skill might find;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He schemes and toils; stone, wood and ore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Subject or weapon of His power.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>By arch and spire, by tower-girt heights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">He would his boast fulfil;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By marble births, and mimic lights⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Yet lacks one secret still;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where is the master-hand shall give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To breathe, to move, to speak, to live?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O take away this shade of might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The puny toil of man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let great Nature in my sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Unroll her gorgeous plan;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I cannot bear those sullen walls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those eyeless towers, those tongueless halls.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Art’s labour’d toys of highest name</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Are nerveless, cold, and dumb;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And man is fitted but to frame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A coffin or a tomb;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well suits, when sense is pass’d away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such lifeless works the lifeless clay.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Here let me sit where wooded hills</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Skirt yon far-reaching plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While cattle bank its winding rills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And suns embrown its grain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such prospect is to me right dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For freedom, health, and joy are here.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There is a spirit ranging through</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The earth, the stream, the air;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ten thousand shapes, garbs ever new,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That busy One doth wear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In colour, scent, and taste, and sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The energy of Life is found.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The leaves are rustling in the breeze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The bird renews her song;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From field to brook, o’er heath, o’er trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The sunbeam glides along;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The insect, happy in its hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Floats softly by, or sips the flower.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now dewy rain descends, and now</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Brisk showers the welkin shroud;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I care not, though with angry brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Frowns the red thunder-cloud;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let hail-storm pelt, and lightning harm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis Nature’s work, and has its charm.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah! lovely Nature! others dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Full favour’d in thy court;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I of thy smiles but hear them tell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And feed on their report,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Catching what glimpse an Ulcombe yields</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To strangers loitering in her fields.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I go where form has ne’er unbent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The sameness of its sway;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where iron rule, stern precedent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Mistreat the graceful day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pine as prisoner in his cell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet be thought to love it well.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet so His high dispose has set,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Who binds on each his part;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though absent, I may cherish yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">An Ulcombe of the heart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calm verdant hope divinely given,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And suns of peace, and scenes of heaven;⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A soul prepared His will to meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Full fix’d His work to do;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not laboured into sudden heat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">But inly born anew.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So living Nature, not dull Art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall plan my ways and rule my heart.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Ulcombe</em>. <time datetime="1826-09"><em>September</em>, 1826.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="introduction-to-an-album" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Introduction</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="subtitle">To an Album</h4>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>I <strong>am</strong> a harp of many chords, and each</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strung by a separate hand;⁠—most musical</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My notes, discoursing with the mental sense,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not the outward ear. Try them, they will reply</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wisdom, fancy, graceful gaiety,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or ready wit, or happy sentiment.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Come, add a string to my assort of sounds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Widen the compass of my harmony;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And join thyself in fellowship of name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With those, whose courteous labour and fair gifts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have given me voice, and made me what I am.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Brighton</em>. <time datetime="1827-04"><em>April</em>, 1827.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="snapdragon" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Snapdragon</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="subtitle">A Riddle for a Flower Book</h4>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>I <strong>am</strong> rooted in the wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of buttress’d tower or ancient hall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prison’d in an art-wrought bed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cased in mortar, cramp’d with lead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a living stock alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brother of the lifeless stone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Else unprized, I have my worth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the spot that gives me birth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nature’s vast and varied field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Braver flowers than me will yield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bold in form and rich in hue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Children of a purer dew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smiling lips and winning eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meet for earthly paradise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Choice are such⁠—and yet thou knowest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Highest he whose lot is lowest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They, proud hearts, a home reject</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Framed by human architect;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Humble-I can bear to dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near the pale recluse’s cell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I spread my crimson bloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mingled with the cloister’s gloom.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Life’s gay gifts and honours rare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flowers of favour! win and wear!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose of beauty, be the queen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In pleasure’s ring and festive scene.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ivy, climb and cluster, where</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lordly oaks vouchsafe a stair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vaunt, fair Lily, stately dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pride of birth and pomp of name.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Miser Crocus, starved with cold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hide in earth thy timid gold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Travell’d Dahlia, freely boast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knowledge brought from foreign coast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pleasure, wealth, birth, knowledge, power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These have each an emblem flower;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So for me alone remains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lowly thought and cheerful pains.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be it mine to set restraint</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On roving wish and selfish plaint;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for man’s drear haunts to leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dewy morn and balmy eve.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be it mine the barren stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To deck with green life not its own.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So to soften and to grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of human works the rugged face.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mine, the Unseen to display</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the crowded public way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where life’s busy arts combine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To shut out the Hand Divine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah! no more a scentless flower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By approving Heaven’s high power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suddenly my leaves exhale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fragrance of the Syrian gale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah! ’tis timely comfort given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the answering breath of Heaven!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May it be! then well might I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In College cloister live and die.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Ulcombe</em>. <time datetime="1827-10-02"><em>October</em> 2, 1827.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-tranch-of-time" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Trance of Time</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem epigraph">
				<p>
					<span>“<i xml:lang="la">Felix, qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas,</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i xml:lang="la">Atque metus omnes, et inexorabile fatum</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i xml:lang="la">Subjecit pedibus, strepitumque Acherontis avari!</i>”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<span><strong>In</strong> childhood, when with eager eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The season-measured year I view’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">All, garb’d in fairy guise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Pledged constancy of good.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Spring sang of heaven; the summer flowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bade me gaze on, and did not fade;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Even suns o’er autumn’s bowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Heard my strong wish, and stay’d.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They came and went, the short-lived four;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet, as their varying dance they wove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To my young heart each bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Its own sure claim of love.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Far different now;⁠—the whirling year</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vainly my dizzy eyes pursue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And its fair tints appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">All blent in one dusk hue.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Why dwell on rich autumnal lights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spring-time, or winter’s social ring?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Long days are fire-side nights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Brown autumn is fresh spring.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then what this world to thee, my heart?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its gifts nor feed thee nor can bless.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Thou hast no owner’s part</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">In all its fleetingness.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The flame, the storm, the quaking ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Earth’s joy, earth’s terror, nought is thine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Thou must but hear the sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Of the still voice divine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O priceless art! O princely state!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">E’en while by sense of change opprest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Within to antedate</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Heaven’s Age of fearless rest.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Highwood</em>. <time datetime="1827-10"><em>October</em>, 1827.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="consolations-in-bereavement" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Consolations in Bereavement</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Death</strong> was full urgent with thee, Sister dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">And startling in his speed;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brief pain, then languor till thy end came near⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Such was the path decreed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">The hurried road</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lead thy soul from earth to thine own God’s abode.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Death wrought with thee, sweet maid, impatiently:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Yet merciful the haste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That baffles sickness;⁠—dearest, thou didst die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Thou wast not made to taste</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">Death’s bitterness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Decline’s slow-wasting charm, or fever’s fierce distress.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Death came unheralded:⁠—but it was well;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">For so thy Saviour bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kind witness, thou wast meet at once to dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">On His eternal shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">All warning spared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For none He gives where hearts are for prompt change prepared.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Death wrought in mystery; both complaint and cure</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">To human skill unknown:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God put aside all means, to make us sure</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">It was His deed alone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">Lest we should lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reproach on our poor selves, that thou wast caught away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Death urged as scant of time:⁠—lest, Sister dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">We many a lingering day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had sicken’d with alternate hope and fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">The ague of delay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">Watching each spark</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of promise quench’d in turn, till all our sky was dark.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Death came and went:⁠—that so thy image might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Our yearning hearts possess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Associate with all pleasant thoughts and bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">With youth and loveliness;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">Sorrow can claim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mary, nor lot nor part in thy soft soothing name.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Joy of sad hearts, and light of downcast eyes!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Dearest thou art enshrined</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In all thy fragrance in our memories;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">For we must ever find</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">Bare thought of thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Freshen this weary life, while weary life shall be.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Oxford</em>. <time datetime="1828-04"><em>April</em>, 1828.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="a-picture" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Picture</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
				<p>“The maiden is not dead, but sleepeth.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<span><strong>She</strong> is not gone;⁠—still in our sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That dearest maid shall live,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In form as true, in tints as bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As youth and health could give.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Still, still is ours the modest eye;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The smile unwrought by art;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glance that shot so piercingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Affection’s keenest dart;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The thrilling voice, I ne’er could hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But felt a joy and pain;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A pride that she was ours, a fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ours she might not remain;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Whether the page divine call’d forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its clear sweet, tranquil tone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or cheerful hymn, or seemly mirth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In sprightlier measure shown;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The meek inquiry of that face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Musing on wonders found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As ’mid dim paths she sought to trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The truth on sacred ground;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The thankful sigh that would arise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When aught her doubts removed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full sure the explaining voice to prize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Admiring while she loved;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The pensive brow, the world might see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When she in crowds was found;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The burst of heart, the o’erflowing glee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When only friends were round;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hope’s warmth of promise, prompt to fill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The thoughts with good in store,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Match’d with content’s deep stream, which still</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Flow’d on, when hope was o’er;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That peace, which, with its own bright day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Made cheapest sights shine fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That purest grace, which track’d its way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Safe from aught earthly there.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Such was she in the sudden hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That brought her Maker’s call⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proving her heart’s self-mastering power</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Blithely to part with all⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All her eye loved, all her hand press’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With keen affection’s glow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The voice of home, all pleasures best,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All dearest thoughts below.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From friend-lit hearth, from social board,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All duteously she rose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For faith upon the Master’s word</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Can find a sure repose.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And in her wonder up she sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And tried relief in vain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then laid her down upon her bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of languor and of pain⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And waited till the solemn spell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(A ling’ring night and day,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should fill its numbers, and compel</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her soul to come away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Such was she then; and such she is,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shrined in each mourner’s breast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such shall she be, and more than this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In promised glory blest;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When in due lines her Saviour dear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His scatter’d saints shall range,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And knit in love souls parted here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where cloud is none, nor change.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Oxford</em>. <time datetime="1828-08"><em>August</em>, 1828.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="my-lady-nature-and-her-daughters" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">My Lady Nature and Her Daughters</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Ladies</strong>, well I deem, delight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In comely tire to move;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soft, and delicate, and bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Are the robes they love.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silks, where hues alternate play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shawls, and scarfs, and mantles gay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gold, and gems, and crispèd hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fling their light o’er lady fair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis not waste, nor sinful pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—Name them not, nor fault beside⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But her very cheerfulness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prompts and weaves the curious dress;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While her holy<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4" id="noteref-4" epub:type="noteref">4</a> thoughts still roam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mid birth-friends and scenes of home.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pleased to please whose praise is dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glitters she? she glitters there;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she has a pattern found her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Nature’s glowing world around her.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nature loves, as lady bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In gayest guise to shine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All forms of grace, all tints of light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Fringe her robe divine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sun-lit heaven, and rain-bow cloud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Changeful main, and mountain proud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Branching tree, and meadow green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All are deck’d in broider’d sheen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not a bird on bough-propp’d tower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Insect slim, nor tiny flower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stone, nor spar, nor shell of sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But is fair in its degree.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis not pride, this vaunt of beauty;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well she ’quits her trust of duty;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, amid her gorgeous state,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bright, and bland, and delicate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever beaming from her face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Praise of a Father’s love we trace.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ladies, shrinking from the view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of the prying day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In tranquil diligence pursue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Their heaven-appointed way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Noiseless duties, silent cares,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mercies lighting unawares,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Modest influence working good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gifts, by the keen heart understood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such as viewless spirits might give,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These they love, in these they live.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mighty Nature speeds her through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her daily toils in silence too:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calmly rolls her giant spheres,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sheds by stealth her dew’s kind tears;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cheating sage’s vex’d pursuit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Churns the sap, matures the fruit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, her deft hand still concealing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kindles motion, life, and feeling.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ladies love to laugh and sing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To rouse the chord’s full sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or to join the festive ring</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Where dancers gather round.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not a sight so fair on earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a lady’s graceful mirth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not a sound so chasing pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a lady’s thrilling strain.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor is Nature left behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In her lighter moods of mind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calm her duties to fulfil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In her glee a prattler still.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bird and beast of every sort</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath its antic and its sport;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chattering brook, and dancing gnat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Subtle cry of evening bat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moss uncouth, and twigs grotesque,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These are Nature’s picturesque.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Where the birth of Poesy?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Its fancy and its fire?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nature’s earth, and sea, and sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Fervid thoughts inspire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where do wealth and power find rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When hopes have fail’d, or toil oppress’d?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Parks, and lawns, and deer, and trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nature’s work, restore them ease.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rare the rich, the gifted rare⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where shall work-day souls repair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unennobled, unrefined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the rude world and unkind?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who shall friend their lowly lot?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High-born Nature answers not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave her in her starry dome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seek we lady-lighted home.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nature ’mid the spheres bears sway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ladies rule where hearts obey.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Oxford</em>. <time datetime="1829-02-04"><em>February</em> 4, 1829.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="opusculum" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Opusculum</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="subtitle">For a Very Small Album</h4>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Fair</strong> Cousin, thy page</span>
				<br/>
				<span>is small to encage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>the thoughts which engage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>the mind of a sage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">such as I am;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Twere in teaspoon to take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>the whole Genevese lake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>or a lap-dog to make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>the white Elephant sac-</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">-red in Siam.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet inadequate though</span>
				<br/>
				<span>to the terms strange and so-</span>
				<br/>
				<span>-lemn that figure in po-</span>
				<br/>
				<span>-lysyllabical row</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">in a treatise;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Still, true words and plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>of the heart, not the brain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>in affectionate strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>this book to contain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">very meet is.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So I promise to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>a good Cousin to thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>and to keep safe the se-</span>
				<br/>
				<span>-cret I heard, although e-</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">-v’ry one know it;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With a lyrical air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>my kind thoughts I would dare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>and offer whate’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>beseems the news, were</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">I a poet.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Brighton</em>. <time datetime="1829-04"><em>April</em>, 1829.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="a-voice-from-afar" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Voice from Afar</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span class="i5"><strong>Weep</strong> not for me;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be blithe as wont, nor tinge with gloom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stream of love that circles home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Light hearts and free!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Joy in the gifts Heaven’s bounty lends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Nor miss my face, dear friends!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i5">I still am near;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Watching the smiles I prized on earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your converse mild, your blameless mirth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Now too I hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of whisper’d sounds the tale complete,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Low prayers, and musings sweet.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i5">A sea before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Throne is spread;⁠—its pure still glass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pictures all earth-scenes as they pass.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">We, on its shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Share, in the bosom of our rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">God’s knowledge, and are blest.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Horsepath</em>. <time datetime="1829-09-29"><em>September</em> 29, 1829.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-hidden-ones" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Hidden Ones</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span class="i2"><strong>Hid</strong> are the saints of God;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uncertified by high angelic sign;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor raiment soft, nor empire’s golden rod</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Marks them divine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Theirs but the unbought air, earth’s parent sod,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And the sun’s smile benign;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Christ rears His throne within the secret heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">From the haughty world apart.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">They gleam amid the night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chill sluggish mists stifling the heavenly ray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fame chants the while⁠—old history trims his light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Aping the day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vain! staid look, loud voice, and reason’s might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Forcing its learned way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blind characters! these aid us not to trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Christ and His princely race.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">Yet not all-hid from those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who watch to see;⁠—’neath their dull guise of earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bright bursting gleams unwittingly disclose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Their heaven-wrought birth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meekness, love, patience, faith’s serene repose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And the soul’s tutor’d mirth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bidding the slow heart dance, to prove her power</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">O’er self in its proud hour.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">These are the chosen few,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The remnant fruit of largely-scatter’d grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God sows in waste, to reap whom He foreknew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Of man’s cold race;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Counting on wills perverse, in His clear view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of boundless time and space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He waits, by scant return for treasures given,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To fill the thrones of heaven.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">Lord! who can trace but Thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The strife obscure, ’twixt sin’s soul-thralling spell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Thy keen Spirit, now quench’d, reviving now?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Or who can tell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why pardon’s seal stands sure on David’s brow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Why Saul and Demas fell?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh! lest our frail hearts in the annealing break,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Help, for Thy mercy’s sake!</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Horsepath</em>. <time datetime="1829-09"><em>September</em>, 1829.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="thanksgiving" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Thanksgiving</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
				<p>“Thou in faithfulness hast afflicted me.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Lord</strong>, in this dust Thy sovereign voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">First quicken’d love divine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am all Thine⁠—Thy care and choice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">My very praise is Thine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I praise Thee, while Thy providence</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In childhood frail I trace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For blessings given, ere dawning sense</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Could seek or scan Thy grace;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Blessings in boyhood’s marvelling hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Bright dreams, and fancyings strange;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blessings, when reason’s awful power</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Gave thought a bolder range;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Blessings of friends, which to my door</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Unask’d, unhoped, have come;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, choicer still, a countless store</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of eager smiles at home.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet, Lord, in memory’s fondest place</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">I shrine those seasons sad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, looking up, I saw Thy face</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In kind austereness clad.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I would not miss one sigh or tear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Heart-pang, or throbbing brow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweet was the chastisement severe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And sweet its memory now.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yes! let the fragrant scars abide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Love-tokens in Thy stead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Faint shadows of the spear-pierced side</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And thorn-encompass’d head.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And such Thy tender force be still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">When self would swerve or stray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shaping to truth the froward will</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Along Thy narrow way.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Deny me wealth; far, far remove</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The lure of power or name;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hope thrives in straits, in weakness love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And faith in this world’s shame.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Oxford</em>. <time datetime="1829-10-20"><em>October</em> 20, 1829.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="monks" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Monks</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="subtitle">For Another Small Album</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">(With lines on hinges to fit it.)</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Why</strong>, dear Cousin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">why</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ask for verses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>when a poet’s</span>
				<br/>
				<span>fount of song is</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">dry?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, if aught be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Harsh and chill, it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>ill may touch the</span>
				<br/>
				<span>hand of lady</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">fair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who can perfumed waters</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a convent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">spring?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Monks in the olden</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“They were rhymesters?”⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>they were rhymesters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>but in Latin</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">rhyme.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Monks in the days of</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">old</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lived in secret,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>in the Church’s</span>
				<br/>
				<span>kindly-sheltering</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">fold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No bland meditators</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a courtly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">lay.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“They had visions</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">bright?”⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>they had visions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>yet not sent in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>slumbers soft and</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No! a lesson</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">stern</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First by vigils,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>fast, and penance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>theirs it was to</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">learn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This their soul-ennobling</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">gain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Joys wrought out by</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">pain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“When from home they</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">stirr’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sweet their voices?”⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>still, a blessing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>closed their merriest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">word;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their gayest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">smile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Told of musings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>solitary,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>and the hallow’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">aisle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Songsters?”⁠—hark! they answer!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plaintive chantings</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">sound!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Grey his cowlèd</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">vest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose strong heart has</span>
				<br/>
				<span>pledged his service</span>
				<br/>
				<span>to the cloister</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">blest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Duly garb’d is</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the frost-work</span>
				<br/>
				<span>gems the branches</span>
				<br/>
				<span>of yon stately</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">tree.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis a danger-thwarting</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">spell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And it fits me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i8">well!</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Oxford</em>. <time datetime="1829-12"><em>December</em>, 1829.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="epiphany-eve" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Epiphany-Eve</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="subtitle">A Birthday Offering</h4>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Birthday</strong> gifts, with the early year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo! we bring thee, Mary dear!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prayer and praise upon thy death</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twined together in a wreath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grief and gladness, such as may</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suit a solemn holiday.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Christmas snow, for maiden’s bloom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blanched in winter’s sudden tomb;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Christmas berries, His red token</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who that grave’s stern seal hath broken;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These for thee the faithful heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Due mementos, sets apart.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Twas a fast, that Eve of sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Herald veil’d of glorious morrow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speechless we sat; and watch’d, to know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How it would be; but time moved slow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along that day of sacred woe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then came the Feast, and we were told</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bravely of our best to bring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Myrrh, and frankincense, and gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As our tribute to our King.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Dearest, gentlest, purest, best!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep is thy mysterious rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now the solemn hours are over</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Angels round thee hover,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the fanning of their wings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Keeping time to one who sings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of high themes consolatory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the All-loving and His glory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the age that has no ending,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the day of thy ascending</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From those shades of paradise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the bright supernal skies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thinkest of us, dearest, ever?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah! so be it nought can sever</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spirit and life, the past and present,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still we yield thee musings pleasant.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—God above, and we below;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So thought ranges, to and fro.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He, in sooth, by tutorings mild,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the rude clay shaped His child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fiery trial, anguish chill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Served not here His secret will;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But His voice was low and tender,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so true was thy surrender,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the work in haste was done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grace and nature blent in one.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Harmless thus, and not unmeet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To kiss the dear prints of thy feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tracing thus the narrow road</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All must tread, and Christ has trod.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Loveliest, meekest, blithest, kindest!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lead! we seek the home thou findest!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though thy name to us most dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go! we would not have thee here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lead, a guiding beacon bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To travellers on the Eve of Light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Welcome aye thy Star before us,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bring it grief or gladness o’er us;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Keen regret and tearful yearning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whiles unfelt, and whiles returning;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or more gracious thoughts abiding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fever-quelling, sorrow-chiding;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, when day-light blessings fail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Transport fresh as spice-fraught gale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sparks from thee, which oft have lighted</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weary heart and hope benighted.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I this monument would raise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Distant from the public gaze.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Few will see it;⁠—few e’er knew thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But their beating hearts pursue thee⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their eyes fond thoughts betoken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though thy name be seldom spoken.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pass on, stranger, and despise it!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These will read, and these will prize it.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Oxford</em>. <time datetime="1830-01-05"><em>January</em> 5, 1830.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-winter-flower" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Winter Flower</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="subtitle">A Birthday Offering</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">(For Music.)</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Bloom</strong>, beloved Flower!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unknown;⁠—’tis no matter.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Courts glitter brief hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Crowds can but flatter.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Plants in the garden</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">See best the Sun’s glory;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They miss the green sward in</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A conservatory.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>—<strong>prized where’er known.</strong>⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sure this is a blessing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Outrings the loud tone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the dull world’s caressing.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Oxford</em>. <time datetime="1830-12-30"><em>December</em> 30, 1830.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="kind-remembrances" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Kind Remembrances</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>’Tis</strong> long, dear Annie, since we met,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet deem not that my heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all that absence, can forget</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A kinsman’s pious part.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>How oft on thee, a sufferer mild,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My kindly thoughts I turn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knows, upon whose altar piled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The prayers of suppliants burn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I love thy name, admiring all</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy sacred heaven-sent pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I love it, for it seems to call</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Lost to earth again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Can I forget, <em>she</em> to thy need</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her ministry supplied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who now, from mortal duty freed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Serves at the Virgin’s side?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What would’st thou more? Upon thy head</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A two-fold grace is pour’d;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both in thyself, and for the dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A witness of thy Lord!</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Oxford</em>. <time datetime="1831-03"><em>March</em>, 1831.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="seeds-in-the-air" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Seeds in the Air</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="subtitle">For an Album</h4>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem epigraph">
				<p>
					<span>“<i xml:lang="la">Igneus est ollis vigor, et cœlestis origo</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span><i xml:lang="la">Seminibus.</i>”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Could</strong> I hit on a theme</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To fashion my verse on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not long would I seem</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A lack-courtesy person.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I have not the skill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor talisman strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To summon at will</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Spirit of song.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bright thoughts are roaming</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unseen in the air;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like comets, their coming</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is sudden and rare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They strike, and they enter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And light up the brain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which thrills to its centre</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With rapturous pain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the chance-seed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is piously nursed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brighter succeed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the path of the first.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One sighs to the Muse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or the sweet nightingale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One sips the night-dews</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which moon-beams exhale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All this is a fiction;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I never could find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A suitable friction</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To frenzy my mind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What use are empirics?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No gas on their shelf</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can make one spout lyrics</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In spite of oneself!</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Dartington</em>. <time datetime="1831-07-18"><em>July</em> 18, 1831.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-pilgrim" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Pilgrim</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="subtitle">For an Album</h4>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>There stray’d awhile, amid the woods of Dart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One who could love them, but who durst not love.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A vow had bound him, ne’er to give his heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To streamlet bright, or soft secluded grove.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twas a hard humbling task, onwards to move</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His easy-captured eyes from each fair spot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With unattach’d and lonely step to rove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er happy meads, which soon its print forgot:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet kept he safe his pledge, prizing his pilgrim-lot.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Dartington</em>. <time datetime="1831-07-21"><em>July</em> 21, 1831.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="home" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Home</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Where’er</strong> I roam in this fair English land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The vision of a Temple meets my eyes:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Modest without; within, all-glorious rise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its love-encluster’d columns, and expand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their slender arms. Like olive-plants they stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each answ’ring each, in home’s soft sympathies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sisters and brothers. At the altar sighs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Parental fondness, and with anxious hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tenders its offering of young vows and prayers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The same, and not the same, go where I will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vision beams! ten thousand shrines, all one.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dear fertile soil! what foreign culture bears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such fruit? And I through distant climes may run</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My weary round, yet miss thy likeness still.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Oxford</em>. <time datetime="1832-11-16"><em>November</em> 16, 1832.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-brand-of-cain" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Brand of Cain</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>I <strong>bear</strong> upon my brow the sign</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of sorrow and of pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas! no hopeful cross is mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It is the brand of Cain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The course of passion, and the fret</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of godless hope and fear⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toil, care, and guilt⁠—their hues have set,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And fix’d their sternness there.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Saviour! wash out the imprinted shame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That I no more may pine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sin’s martyr, though not meet to claim</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy cross, a saint of Thine.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Oxford</em>. <time datetime="1832-11-18"><em>November</em> 18, 1832.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="zeal-and-love" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Zeal and Love</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>And</strong> would’st thou reach, rash scholar mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Love’s high unruffled state?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awake! thy easy dreams resign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">First learn thee how to hate:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hatred of sin, and Zeal, and Fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lead up the Holy Hill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Track them, till Charity appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A self-denial still.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Dim is the philosophic flame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By thoughts severe unfed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Book-lore ne’er served, when trial came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor gifts, when faith was dead.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Oxford</em>. <time datetime="1832-11-20"><em>November</em> 20, 1832.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="persecution" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Persecution</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
				<p>“And the woman fled into the wilderness.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Say</strong>, who is he in deserts seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or at the twilight hour?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of garb austere, and dauntless mien,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Measured in speech, in purpose keen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calm as in Heaven he had been,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet blithe when perils lower.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>My Holy Mother made reply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Dear child, it is my Priest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The world has cast me forth, and I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dwell with wild earth and gusty sky;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He bears to men my mandates high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And works my sage behest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Another day, dear child, and thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shalt join his sacred band.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah! well I deem, thou shrinkest now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From urgent rule, and severing vow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gay hopes flit round, and light thy brow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Time hath a taming hand!”</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Oxford</em>. <time datetime="1832-11-22"><em>November</em> 22, 1832.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="zeal-and-purity" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Zeal and Purity</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
				<p>“Come to me, and see my zeal for the Lord.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Thou</strong> to wax fierce</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the cause of the Lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To threat and to pierce</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the heavenly sword!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anger and Zeal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the Joy of the brave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who bade <em>thee</em> to feel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Sin’s slave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Altar’s pure flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Consumes as it soars:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Faith meetly may blame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For it serves and adores.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou warnest and smitest!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet Christ must atone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a soul that thou slightest⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Thine own.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Oxford</em>. <time datetime="1832-11-23"><em>November</em> 23, 1832.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-gift-of-preserverance" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Gift of Preserverance</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Once</strong>, as I brooded o’er my guilty state,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A fever seized me, duties to devise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To buy me interest in my Saviour’s eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not that His love I would extenuate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But scourge and penance, masterful self-hate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or gift of cost, served by an artifice</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To quell my restless thoughts and envious sighs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And doubts, which fain heaven’s peace would antedate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus as I tossed, He said:⁠—“E’en holiest deeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shroud not the soul from God, nor soothe its needs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deny thee thine own fears, and wait the end!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stern lesson! Let me con it day by day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And learn to kneel before the Omniscient Ray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor shrink, when Truth’s avenging shafts descend!</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Oxford</em>. <time datetime="1832-11-23"><em>November</em> 23, 1832.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-sign-of-the-cross" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Sign of the Cross</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Whene’er</strong> across this sinful flesh of mine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I draw the Holy Sign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All good thoughts stir within me, and renew</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their slumbering strength divine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till there springs up a courage high and true</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To suffer and to do.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And who shall say, but hateful spirits around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For their brief hour unbound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shudder to see, and wail their overthrow?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While on far heathen ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some lonely Saint hails the fresh odour, though</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its source he cannot know.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Oxford</em>. <time datetime="1832-11-25"><em>November</em> 25, 1832.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="bondage" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Bondage</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>O <strong>prophet</strong>, tell me not of peace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or Christ’s all-loving deeds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Death only can from sin release,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And death to judgment leads.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou from thy birth hast set thy face</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards thy Redeemer Lord;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tend and deck His holy place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And note his secret word.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I ne’er shall reach Heaven’s glorious path;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet haply tears may stay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The purpose of His instant wrath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And slake the fiery day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then plead for one who cannot pray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose faith is but despair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who hates his heart, nor puts away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sin that rankles there.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5" id="noteref-5" epub:type="noteref">5</a></span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Iffley</em>. <time datetime="1832-11-28"><em>November</em> 28, 1832.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-scars-of-sin" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Scars of Sin</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>My</strong> smile is bright, my glance is free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My voice is calm and clear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dear friend, I seem a type to thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of holy love and fear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But I am scann’d by eyes unseen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And these no saint surround;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They mete what is by what has been,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And joy the lost is found.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Erst my good Angel shrank to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My thoughts and ways of ill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now he scarce dare gaze on me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scar-seam’d and crippled still.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Iffley</em>. <time datetime="1832-11-29"><em>November</em> 29, 1832.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="angelic-guidance" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Angelic Guidance</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Are</strong> these the tracks of some unearthly Friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His foot-prints, and his vesture-skirts of light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, as I talk with men, conforms aright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their sympathetic words, or deeds that blend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With my hid thought;⁠—or stoops him to attend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My doubtful-pleading grief;⁠—or blunts the might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of ill I see not;⁠—or in dreams of night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Figures the scope, in which what is will end?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were I Christ’s own, then fitly might I call</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That vision real; for to the thoughtful mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That walks with Him, He half unveils His face;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, when on earth-stain’d souls such tokens fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These dare not claim as theirs what there they find,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, not all hopeless, eye His boundless grace.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Whitchurch</em>. <time datetime="1832-12-03"><em>December</em> 3, 1832.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="substance-and-shadow" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Substance and Shadow</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>They</strong> do but grope in learning’s pedant round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who on the fantasies of sense bestow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An idol substance, bidding us bow low</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before those shades of being which are found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stirring or still, on man’s brief trial-ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if such shapes and moods, which come and go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had aught of Truth or Life in their poor show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sway or judge, and skill to sane or wound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Son of immortal seed, high-destined Man!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Know thy dread gift⁠—a creature, yet a cause:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each mind is its own centre, and it draws</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Home to itself, and moulds in its thought’s span</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All outward things, the vassals of its will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aided by Heaven, by earth unthwarted still.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Falmouth</em>. <time datetime="1832-12-07"><em>December</em> 7, 1832.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="wanderings" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Wanderings</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Ere</strong> yet I left home’s youthful shrine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My heart and hope were stored</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where first I caught the rays divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And drank the Eternal Word.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I went afar; the world unroll’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her many-pictured page;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I stored the marvels which she told,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And trusted to her gage.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Her pleasures quaff’d, I sought awhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The scenes I prized before;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But parent’s praise and sister’s smile</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stirr’d my cold heart no more.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So ever sear, so ever cloy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Earth’s favours as they fade;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since Adam lost for one fierce joy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His Eden’s sacred shade.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Off the Lizard</em>. <time datetime="1832-12-08"><em>December</em> 8, 1832.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-saint-and-the-hero" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Saint and the Hero</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>O <strong>aged</strong> Saint! far off I heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The praises of thy name;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy deed of power, thy prudent word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy zeal’s triumphant flame.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I came and saw; and, having seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Weak heart, I drew offence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From thy prompt smile, thy simple mien,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy lowly diligence.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Saint’s is not the Hero’s praise;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This I have found, and learn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor to malign Heaven’s humblest ways,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor its least boon to spurn.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Bay of Biscay</em>. <time datetime="1832-12-10"><em>December</em> 10, 1832.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="private-judgment" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Private Judgment</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Poor</strong> wand’rers, ye are sore distress’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To find that path which Christ has bless’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Track’d by His saintly throng;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each claims to trust his own weak will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blind idol!⁠—so ye languish still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All wranglers and all wrong.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He saw of old, and met your need,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Granting you prophets of His creed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The throes of fear to swage;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They fenced the rich bequest He made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sacred hands have safe convey’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their charge from age to age.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wand’rers! come home! obey the call!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Mother pleads, who ne’er let fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One grain of Holy Truth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warn you and win she shall and must,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For now she lifts her from the dust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To reign as in her youth.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Off Cape Ortegal</em>. <time datetime="1832-12-11"><em>December</em> 11, 1832.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-watchman" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVI</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Watchman</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">(A Song.)</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Faint</strong> not, and fret not, for threaten’d woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Watchman on Truth’s grey height!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Few though the faithful, and fierce though the foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Weakness is aye Heaven’s might.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Infidel Ammon and niggard Tyre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Ill-fitted pair, unite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some work for love, and some work for hire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">But weakness shall be Heaven’s might.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Eli’s feebleness, Saul’s black wrath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">May aid Ahithophel’s spite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And prayers from Gerizim, and curses from Gath⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Our weakness shall prove Heaven’s might.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quail not, and quake not, thou Warder bold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Be there no friend in sight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turn thee to question the days of old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">When weakness was aye Heaven’s might.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Moses was one, but he stay’d the sin</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of the host, in the Presence bright;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Elias scorn’d the Carmel din,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">When Baal would match Heaven’s might.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Time’s years are many, Eternity one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And one is the Infinite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chosen are few, few the deeds well done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">For scantness is still Heaven’s might.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>At Sea</em>. <time datetime="1832-12-12"><em>December</em> 12, 1832.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-isles-of-the-sirens" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Isles of the Sirens</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Cease</strong>, Stranger, cease those piercing notes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The craft of Siren choirs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hush the seductive voice, that floats</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the languid wires.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Music’s ethereal fire was given</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not to dissolve our clay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But draw Promethean beams from Heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And purge the dross away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Weak self! with thee the mischief lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those throbs a tale disclose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor age nor trial has made wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Man of many woes.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Off Lisbon</em>. <time datetime="1832-12-13"><em>December</em> 13, 1832.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="absolution" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVIII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Absolution</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>O <strong>Father</strong>, list a sinner’s call!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fain would I hide from man my fall⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">But I must speak, or faint⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I cannot wear guilt’s silent thrall:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Cleanse me, kind Saint!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Sinner ne’er blunted yet sin’s goad;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speed thee, my son, a safer road,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And sue His pardoning smile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who walk’d woe’s depths, bearing man’s load</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of guilt the while.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet raise a mitigating hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And minister some potion bland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Some present fever-stay!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest one for whom His work was plann’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Die from dismay.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Look not to me⁠—no grace is mine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I can lift the Mercy-sign.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">This wouldst thou? Let it be!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kneel down, and take the word divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1"><strong>Absolvo Te</strong>.”</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Off Cape <abbr>St.</abbr> Vincent</em>. <time datetime="1832-12-14"><em>December</em> 14, 1832.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="memory" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIX</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Memory</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>My</strong> home is now a thousand miles away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet in my thoughts its every image fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rises as keen, as I still linger’d there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, turning me, could all I loved survey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so, upon Death’s unaverted day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As I speed upwards, I shall on me bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in no breathless whirl, the things that were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And duties given, and ends I did obey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, when at length I reach the Throne of Power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah! still unscared, I shall in fulness see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vision of my past innumerous deeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My deep heart-courses, and their motive-seeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So to gaze on till the red dooming hour.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lord, in that strait, the Judge! remember me!</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Off Cape Trafalgar</em>. <time datetime="1832-12-15"><em>December</em> 15, 1832.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-haven" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XL</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Haven</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Whence</strong> is this awe, by stillness spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">O’er the world-fretted soul?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wave rear’d on wave its godless head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While my keen bark, by breezes sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dash’d fiercely through the ocean bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And chafed towards its goal.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But now there reigns so deep a rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That I could almost weep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sinner! thou hast in this rare guest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Adam’s peace a figure blest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis Eden neared, though not possess’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Which cherub-flames still keep.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Gibraltar</em>. <time datetime="1832-12-16"><em>December</em> 16, 1832.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="a-word-in-season" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLI</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Word in Season</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>O <strong>Lord</strong>! when sin’s close-marshall’d line</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Assails Thy witness on his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How should he raise Thy glorious sign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And how Thy will display?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thy holy Paul, with soul of flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rose on Mars’ hill, a soldier lone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall I thus speak th’ Atoning Name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though with a heart of stone?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Not so,” He said: “hush thee, and seek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With thoughts in prayer and watchful eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My seasons sent for thee to speak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And use them as they rise.”</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Gibraltar</em>. <time datetime="1832-12-17"><em>December</em> 17, 1832.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="fair-words" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Fair Words</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Thy</strong> words are good, and freely given,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">As though thou felt them true;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Friend, think thee well, to hell or heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A serious heart is due.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It pains thee sore, man’s will should swerve</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In his true path divine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet thou ventur’st nought to serve</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Thy neighbour’s weal nor thine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Beware! such words may once be said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Where shame and fear unite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, spoken twice, they mark instead</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A sin against the light.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Gibraltar</em>. <time datetime="1832-12-17"><em>December</em> 17, 1832.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="england" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">England</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Tyre</strong> of the West, and glorying in the name</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More than in Faith’s pure fame!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O trust not crafty fort nor rock renown’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Earn’d upon hostile ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wielding Trade’s master-keys, at thy proud will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lock or loose its waters, England! trust not still.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Dread thine own power! Since haughty Babel’s prime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">High towers have been man’s crime.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since her hoar age, when the huge moat lay bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Strongholds have been man’s snare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy nest is in the crags; ah! refuge frail!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mad counsel in its hour, or traitors, will prevail.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He who scann’d Sodom for His righteous men</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Still spares thee for thy ten;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, should vain tongues the Bride of Heaven defy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He will not pass thee by;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, as earth’s kings welcome their spotless guest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So gives He them by turn, to suffer or be blest.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>At Sea</em>. <time datetime="1832-12-18"><em>December</em> 18, 1832.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="moses" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIV</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Moses</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Moses</strong>, the patriot fierce, became</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The meekest man on earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To show us how love’s quick’ning flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Can give our souls new birth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Moses, the man of meekest heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lost Canaan by self-will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To show, where Grace has done its part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How sin defiles us still.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou, who hast taught me in Thy fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet seest me frail at best,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O grant me loss with Moses here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To gain his future rest!</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>At Sea</em>. <time datetime="1832-12-19"><em>December</em> 19, 1832.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-patient-church" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLV</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Patient Church</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span class="i3"><strong>Bide</strong> thou thy time!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Watch with meek eyes the race of pride and crime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sit in the gate, and be the heathen’s jest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Smiling and self-possest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O thou, to whom is pledged a victor’s sway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Bide thou the victor’s day!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i3">Think on the sin<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6" id="noteref-6" epub:type="noteref">6</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>That reap’d the unripe seed, and toil’d to win</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Foul history-marks at Bethel and at Dan;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">No blessing, but a ban;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whilst the wise Shepherd<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7" id="noteref-7" epub:type="noteref">7</a> hid his heaven-told fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Nor reck’d a tyrant’s hate.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i3">Such loss is gain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wait the bright Advent that shall loose thy chain!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>E’en now the shadows break, and gleams divine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Edge the dim distant line.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thrones are trembling, and earth’s fat ones quail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">True Seed! thou shalt prevail!</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Off Algiers</em>. <time datetime="1832-12-20"><em>December</em> 20, 1832.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="jeremiah" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVI</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Jeremiah</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
				<p>“O that I had in the wilderness a lodging-place of wayfaring men; that I might leave my people, and go from them!”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<span>“<strong>Woe’s</strong> me!” the peaceful prophet cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Spare me this troubled life;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To stem man’s wrath, to school his pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To head the sacred strife!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O place me in some silent vale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where groves and flowers abound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor eyes that grudge, nor tongues that rail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vex the truth-haunted ground!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If his meek spirit err’d, opprest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That God denied repose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What sin is ours, to whom Heaven’s rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is pledged, to heal earth’s woes?</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Off Galita</em>. <time datetime="1832-12-22"><em>December</em> 22, 1832.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="penance" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Penance</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Mortal</strong>! if e’er thy spirits faint,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By grief or pain opprest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seek not vain hope, or sour complaint,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To cheer or ease thy breast:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But view thy bitterest pangs as sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A shadow of that doom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which is the soul’s just punishment</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In its own guilt’s true home.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Be thine own judge; hate thy proud heart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And while the sad drops flow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>E’en let thy will attend the smart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sanctify thy woe.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Off Pantellaria</em>. <time datetime="1832-12-23"><em>December</em> 23, 1832.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-course-of-truth" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVIII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Course of Truth</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
				<p>“Him God raised up the third day, and showed Him openly, not to all the people, but unto witnesses chosen before of God.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<span><strong>When</strong> royal Truth, released from mortal throes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burst His brief slumber, and triumphant rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Ill had the Holiest sued</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">A patron multitude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or courted Tetrarch’s eye, or claim’d to rule</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the world’s winning grace, or proofs from learned school.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">But, robing Him in viewless air, He told</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His secret to a few of meanest mould;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">They in their turn imparted</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">The gift of men pure-hearted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While the brute many heard His mysteries high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As some strange fearful tongue, and crouch’d, they knew not why.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Still is the might of Truth, as it has been:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lodged in the few, obey’d, and yet unseen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Rear’d on lone heights, and rare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">His saints their watch-flame bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the mad world sees the wide-circling blaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vain searching whence it streams, and how to quench its rays.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Malta</em>. <time datetime="1832-12-24"><em>December</em> 24, 1832.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="christmas-without-christ" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIX</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Christmas Without Christ</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>How</strong> can I keep my Christmas feast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In its due festive show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reft of the sight of the High Priest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From whom its glories flow?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I hear the tuneful bells around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The blessèd towers I see;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A stranger on a foreign ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They peal a fast for me.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O Britons! now so brave and high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How will ye weep the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Christ in judgment passes by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And calls the Bride away!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Your Christmas then will lose its mirth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your Easter lose its bloom:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abroad, a scene of strife and dearth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within, a cheerless home!</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Malta</em>. <time datetime="1832-12-25"><em>December</em> 25, 1832.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="sleeplessness" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">L</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Sleeplessness</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Unwearied</strong> God, before whose face</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The night is clear as day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whilst we, poor worms, o’er life’s scant race</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now creep, and now delay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We with death’s foretaste alternate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our labour’s dint and sorrow’s weight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save in that fever-troubled state</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When pain or care has sway.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Dread Lord! Thy glory, watchfulness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is but disease in man;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We to our cost our bounds transgress</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Thy eternal plan:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pride grasps the powers by Thee display’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet ne’er the rebel effort made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But fell beneath the sudden shade</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of nature’s withering ban.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Malta</em>. <time datetime="1832-12-26"><em>December</em> 26, 1832.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="abraham" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LI</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Abraham</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>The</strong> better portion didst thou choose, Great Heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy God’s first choice, and pledge of Gentile grace!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Faith’s truest type, he with unruffled face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bore the world’s smile, and bade her slaves depart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether, a trader, with no trader’s art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He buys in Canaan his last resting-place⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or freely yields rich Siddim’s ample space⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or braves the rescue, and the battle’s smart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet scorns the heathen gifts of those he saved.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O happy in their soul’s high solitude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who commune thus with God, and not with earth!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid the scoffings of the wealth-enslaved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A ready prey, as though in absent mood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They calmly move, nor reck the unmanner’d mirth.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>At Sea</em>. <time datetime="1832-12-27"><em>December</em> 27, 1832.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-greek-fathers" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Greek Fathers</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Let</strong> heathen sing thy heathen praise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fall’n Greece! the thought of holier days</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In my sad heart abides;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For sons of thine in Truth’s first hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were tongues and weapons of His power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Born of the Spirit’s fiery shower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our fathers and our guides.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All thine is Clement’s varied page;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Dionysius, ruler sage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In days of doubt and pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Origen with eagle eye;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saintly Basil’s purpose high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To smite imperial heresy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cleanse the Altar’s stain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From thee the glorious preacher came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With soul of zeal and lips of flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A court’s stern martyr-guest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thine, O inexhaustive race!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was Nazianzen’s heaven-taught grace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And royal-hearted Athanase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Paul’s own mantle blest.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Off Zante</em>. <time datetime="1832-12-28"><em>December</em> 28, 1832.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-witness" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Witness</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>How</strong> shall a child of God fulfil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His vow to cleanse his soul from ill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And raise on high his baptism-light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like Aaron’s seed in vestment white</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And holy-hearted Nazarite?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>First, let him shun the haunts of vice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sin-feast, or heathen sacrifice;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fearing the board of wealthy pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or heretic, self-trusting guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or where the adulterer’s smiles preside.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Next, as he threads the maze of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aye must he lift his witness, when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sin is spoke in Heaven’s dread face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And none at hand of higher grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Cross to carry in his place.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But if he hears and sits him still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First, he will lose his hate of ill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Next, fear of sinning, after hate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Small sins his heart then desecrate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And last, despair persuades to great.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Off Ithaca</em>. <time datetime="1832-12-30"><em>December</em> 30, 1832.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-death-of-moses" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIV</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Death of Moses</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>My</strong> Father’s hope! my childhood’s dream!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The promise from on high!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long waited for! its glories beam</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now when my death is nigh.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>My death is come, but not decay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor eye nor mind is dim;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The keenness of youth’s vigorous day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thrills in each nerve and limb.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Blest scene! thrice welcome after toil⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If no deceit I view;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O might my lips but press the soil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And prove the vision true!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Its glorious heights, its wealthy plains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its many-tinted groves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They call! but He my steps restrains</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who chastens whom He loves.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah! now they melt⁠ ⁠… they are but shades⁠ ⁠…</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I die!⁠—yet is no rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Lord! in store, since Canaan fades</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But seen, and not possest?</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Off Ithaca</em>. <time datetime="1832-12-30"><em>December</em> 30, 1832.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="melchizedek" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LV</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Melchizedek</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
				<p>“Without father, without mother, without descent; having neither beginning of days, nor end of life.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Thrice</strong> bless’d are they, who feel their loneliness;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To whom nor voice of friends nor pleasant scene</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brings aught on which the sadden’d heart can lean;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, the rich earth, garb’d in her daintiest dress</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of light and joy, doth but the more oppress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Claiming responsive smiles and rapture high;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till, sick at heart, beyond the veil they fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeking His Presence, who alone can bless.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such, in strange days, the weapons of Heaven’s grace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, passing o’er the high-born Hebrew line,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He moulds the vessel of His vast design;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fatherless, homeless, reft of age and place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sever’d from earth, and careless of its wreck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Born through long woe His rare Melchizedek.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Corfu</em>. <time datetime="1833-01-05"><em>January</em> 5, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="corcyra" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVI</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Corcyra</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>I <strong>sat</strong> beneath an olive’s branches grey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gazed upon the sight of a lost town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By sage and poet raised to long renown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where dwelt a race that on the sea held sway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, restless as its waters, forced a way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For civil strife a hundred states to drown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That multitudinous stream we now note down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though one life, in birth and in decay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But is their being’s history spent and run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose spirits live in awful singleness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each in its self-form’d sphere of light or gloom?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Henceforth, while pondering the fierce deeds then done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such reverence on me shall its seal impress</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though I corpses saw, and walk’d the tomb.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>At Sea</em>. <time datetime="1833-01-07"><em>January</em> 7, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="transfiguration" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Transfiguration</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
				<p>“They glorified God in me.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<span>I <strong>saw</strong> thee once and nought discern’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">For stranger to admire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A serious aspect, but it burn’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">With no unearthly fire.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Again I saw, and I confess’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Thy speech was rare and high;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet it vex’d my burden’d breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And scared, I knew not why.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I saw once more, and awe-struck gazed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">On face, and form, and air;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God’s living glory round thee blazed⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A Saint⁠—a Saint was there!</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Off Zante</em>. <time datetime="1833-01-08"><em>January 8</em>, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="behind-the-veil" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVIII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Behind the Veil</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Banish’d</strong> the House of sacred rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Amid a thoughtless throng,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At length I heard its creed confess’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And knelt the saints among.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Artless his strain and unadorn’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who spoke Christ’s message there;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But what at home I might have scorn’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now charm’d my famish’d ear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lord, grant me this abiding grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy Word and sons to know;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pierce the veil on Moses’ face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Although his speech be slow.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>At Sea</em>. <time datetime="1833-01-09"><em>January</em> 9, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="judgment" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIX</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Judgment</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>If</strong> e’er I fall beneath Thy rod,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As through life’s snares I go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save me from David’s lot, O God!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And choose Thyself the woe.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>How should I face Thy plagues? which scare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And haunt, and stun, until</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heart or sinks in mute despair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or names a random ill.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If else⁠ ⁠… then guide in David’s path,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who chose the holier pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Satan and man are tools of wrath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An Angel’s scourge is gain.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Off Malta</em>. <time datetime="1833-01-10"><em>January</em> 10, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="sensitiveness" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LX</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Sensitiveness</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Time</strong> was, I shrank from what was right</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From fear of what was wrong;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I would not brave the sacred fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because the foe was strong.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But now I cast that finer sense</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sorer shame aside;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such dread of sin was indolence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such aim at Heaven was pride.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So, when my Saviour calls, I rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And calmly do my best;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaving to Him, with silent eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of hope and fear, the rest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I step, I mount where He has led;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Men count my haltings o’er;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know them; yet, though self I dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I love His precept more.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Lazaret, Malta</em>. <time datetime="1833-01-15"><em>January</em> 15, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="david-and-jonathan" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXI</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">David and Jonathan</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
				<p>“Thy love to me was wonderful, passing the love of women.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<span>O <strong>heart</strong> of fire! misjudged by wilful man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou flower of Jesse’s race!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What woe was thine, when thou and Jonathan</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Last greeted face to face!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He doom’d to die, thou on us to impress</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The portent of a blood-stain’d holiness.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet it was well:⁠—for so, ’mid cares of rule</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And crime’s encircling tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A spell was o’er thee, zealous one, to cool</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Earth-joy and kingly pride;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With battle-scene and pageant, prompt to blend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pale calm spectre of a blameless friend.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah! had he lived, before thy throne to stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy spirit keen and high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sure it had snapp’d in twain love’s slender band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So dear in memory;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Paul, of his comrade reft, the warning gives⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He lives to us who dies, he is but lost who lives.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Lazaret, Malta</em>. <time datetime="1833-01-16"><em>January</em> 16, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="humiliation" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Humiliation</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>I <strong>have</strong> been honour’d and obey’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I have met scorn and slight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And my heart loves earth’s sober shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More than her laughing light.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For what is rule but a sad weight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of duty and a snare?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What meanness, but with happier fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Saviour’s Cross to share?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This my hid choice, if not from heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Moves on the heavenward line;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cleanse it, good Lord, from earthly leaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And make it simply Thine.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Lazaret, Malta</em>. <time datetime="1833-01-16"><em>January</em> 16, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-call-of-david" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Call of David</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
				<p>“And the Lord said, Arise, anoint him, for this is he.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Latest</strong> born of Jesse’s race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wonder lights thy bashful face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the Prophet’s gifted oil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seals thee for a path of toil.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We, thy Angels, circling round thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ne’er shall find thee as we found thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thy faith first brought us near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thy lion-fight severe.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Go! and mid thy flocks awhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At thy doom of greatness smile;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bold to bear God’s heaviest load,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dimly guessing of the road⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rocky road, and scarce ascended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though thy foot be angel-tended.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Twofold praise thou shalt attain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In royal court and battle plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then comes heart-ache, care, distress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blighted hope, and loneliness;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wounds from friend and gifts from foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dizzied faith, and guilt, and woe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loftiest aims by earth defiled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gleams of wisdom sin-beguiled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sated power’s tyrannic mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Counsels shared with men of blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sad success, parental tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a dreary gift of years.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Strange, that guileless face and form</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lavish on the scarring storm!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet we take thee in thy blindness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we buffet thee in kindness;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Little chary of thy fame⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dust unborn may bless or blame⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But we mould thee for the root</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of man’s promised healing Fruit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we mould thee hence to rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As our brother, to the skies.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Lazaret, Malta</em>. <time datetime="1833-01-18"><em>January</em> 18, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="a-blight" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIV</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Blight</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>What</strong> time my heart unfolded its fresh leaves</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In springtime gay, and scatter’d flowers around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A whisper warn’d of earth’s unhealthy ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all that there love’s light and pureness grieves;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Sun’s ray and canker-worm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">And sudden-whelming storm;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, ah! my self-will smiled, nor reck’d the gracious sound.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So now defilement dims life’s memory-springs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I cannot hear an early-cherish’d strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But first a joy, and then it brings a pain⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fear, and self-hate, and vain remorseful stings:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Tears lull my grief to rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Not without hope, this breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May one day lose its load, and youth yet bloom again.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Lazaret, Malta</em>. <time datetime="1833-01-19"><em>January</em> 19, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="joseph" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXV</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Joseph</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>O <strong>purest</strong> Symbol of the Eternal Son!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who dwelt in thee, as in some sacred shrine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To draw hearts after thee, and make them thine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not parent only by that light was won,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brethren crouch’d who had in wrath begun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But heathen pomp abased her at the sign</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the hid Presence of a guest divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till a king heard, and all thou bad’st was done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then was fulfill’d Nature’s dim augury,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That “Wisdom, clad in visible form, would be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So fair, that all must love and bow the knee;”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest it might seem, what time the Substance came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Truth lack’d a sceptre, when It but laid by</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its beaming front, and bore a willing shame.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Lazaret, Malta</em>. <time datetime="1833-01-20"><em>January</em> 20, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="superstition" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVI</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Superstition</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">O <strong>Lord</strong> and Christ, Thy Children of the South</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">So shudder, when they see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The two-edged sword sharp-issuing from Thy mouth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">As to fall back from Thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cling to charms of man, or heathen rite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To aid them against Thee, Thou Fount of love and light!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">But I before Thine awful eyes will go</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And firmly fix me there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In my fall shame; not bent my doom to know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Not fainting with despair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not fearing less than they, but deeming sure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If e’en Thy Name shall fail, nought my base heart can cure.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Lazaret, Malta</em>. <time datetime="1833-01-21"><em>January</em> 21, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="isaac" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Isaac</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Many</strong> the guileless years the Patriarch spent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bless’d in the wife a father’s foresight chose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Many the prayers and gracious deeds, which rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Daily thank-offerings from his pilgrim tent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet these, though written in the heavens, are rent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From out truth’s lower roll, which sternly shows</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But one sad trespass at his history’s close,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Father’s, son’s, mother’s, and its punishment.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not in their brightness, but their earthly stains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are the true seed vouchsafed to earthly eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sin can read sin, but dimly scans high grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So we move heavenward with averted face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scared into faith by warning of sin’s pains;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Saints are lower’d, that the world may rise.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Valletta</em>. <time datetime="1833-01-23"><em>January</em> 23, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="reverses" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVIII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Reverses</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span class="i1"><strong>When</strong> mirth is full and free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some sudden gloom shall be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When haughty power mounts high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Watcher’s axe is nigh.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All growth has bound; when greatest found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It hastes to die.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">When the rich town, that long</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Has lain its huts among,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Uprears its pageants vast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And vaunts⁠—it shall not last!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bright tints that shine, are but a sign</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of summer past.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">And when thine eye surveys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With fond adoring gaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And yearning heart, thy friend⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Love to its grave doth tend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All gifts below, save Truth, but grow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards an end.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Valletta</em>. <time datetime="1833-01-30"><em>January</em> 30, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="hope" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIX</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Hope</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>We</strong> are not children of a guilty sire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since Noe stepp’d from out his wave-toss’d home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And a stern baptism flush’d earth’s faded bloom.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not that the heavens then clear’d, or cherub’s fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Eden’s portal did at once retire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But thoughts were stirr’d of Him who was to come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose rainbow hues so streak’d the o’ershadowing gloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That faith could e’en that desolate scene admire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Lord has come and gone; and now we wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The second substance of the deluge type,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When our slight ark shall cross a molten surge;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So, while the gross earth melts, for judgment ripe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ne’er with its haughty turrets to emerge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We shall mount up to Eden’s long-lost gate.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Valletta</em>. <time datetime="1833-02-05"><em>February</em> 5, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="st-paul-at-melita" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXX</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>St.</abbr> Paul at Melita</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
				<p>“And when Paul had gathered a bundle of sticks, and laid them on the fire, there came a viper out of the heat.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Secure</strong> in his prophetic strength,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The water peril o’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The many-gifted man at length</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stepp’d on the promised shore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He trod the shore; but not to rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor wait till Angels came;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo! humblest pains the Saint attest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The firebrands and the flame.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But, when he felt the viper’s smart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then instant aid was given;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Christian! hence learn to do thy part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And leave the rest to Heaven.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Messina</em>. <time datetime="1833-02-08"><em>February</em> 8, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="messina" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXI</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Messina</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
				<p>“<i xml:lang="la">Homo sum; humani nil à me alienum puto</i>.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Why</strong>, wedded to the Lord, still yearns my heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Towards these scenes of ancient heathen fame?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet legend hoar, and voice of bard that came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fixing my restless youth with its sweet art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shades of power, and those who bore a part</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the mad deeds that set the world on flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So fret my memory here⁠—ah! is it blame?⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That from my eyes the tear is fain to start.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, from no fount impure these drops arise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis but that sympathy with Adam’s race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When in each brother’s history reads its own.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So let the cliffs and seas of this fair place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be named man’s tomb and splendid record-stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High hope, pride-stain’d, the course without the prize.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Messina</em>. <time datetime="1833-02-09"><em>February</em> 9, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="warnings" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Warnings</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>When</strong> Heaven sends sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Warnings go first,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Lest it should burst</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">With stunning might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">On souls too bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i7">To fear the morrow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Can science bear us</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">To the hid springs</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Of human things?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Why may not dream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Or thought’s day-gleam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i7">Startle, yet cheer us?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Are such thoughts fetters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">While Faith disowns</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Dread of earth’s tones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Reeks but Heaven’s call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">And on the wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i7">Reads but Heaven’s letters?</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Between Calatafimi and Palermo</em>. <time datetime="1833-02-12"><em>February</em> 12, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="dreams" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Dreams</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span class="i2"><strong>Oh</strong>! miserable power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To dreams allow’d, to raise the guilty past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And back awhile the illumined spirit to cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">On its youth’s twilight hour;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In mockery guiling it to act again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The revel or the scoff in Satan’s frantic train!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">Nay, hush thee, angry heart!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An Angel’s grief ill fits a penitent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Welcome the thorn⁠—it is divinely sent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And with its wholesome smart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall pierce thee in thy virtue’s palmy home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And warn thee what thou art, and whence thy wealth has come.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Pæstum</em>. <time datetime="1833-02-26"><em>February</em> 26, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="temptation" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIV</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Temptation</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>O <strong>holy</strong> Lord, who with the Children Three</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Didst walk the piercing flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Help, in those trial-hours, which, save to Thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">I dare not name;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor let these quivering eyes and sickening heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crumble to dust beneath the Tempter’s dart.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou, who didst once Thy life from Mary’s breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Renew from day to day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh, might her smile, severely sweet, but rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">On this frail clay!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till I am Thine with my whole soul; and fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not feel a secret joy, that Hell is near.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Frascati</em>. <time datetime="1833-03-28"><em>March</em> 28, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="our-future" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXV</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Our Future</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
				<p>“What I do, thou knowest not now; but thou shalt know hereafter.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<span class="i4"><strong>Did</strong> we but see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When life first open’d, how our journey lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between its earliest and its closing day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or view ourselves, as we one time shall be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who strive for the high prize, such sight would break</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The youthful spirit, though bold for Jesu’s sake.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i4">But Thou, dear Lord!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whilst I traced out bright scenes which were to come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Isaac’s pure blessings, and a verdant home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Didst spare me, and withhold Thy fearful word;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Willing me year by year, till I am found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A pilgrim pale, with Paul’s sad girdle bound.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Tre Fontane</em>. <time datetime="1833-04-02"><em>April</em> 2, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="heathenism" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVI</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Heathenism</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span class="i2"><strong>‘Mid</strong> Balak’s magic fires</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Spirit spake, clear as in Israel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With prayers untrue and covetous desires</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Did God vouchsafe to dwell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who summon’d dreams, His earlier word to bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To patient Job’s vex’d friends, and Gerar’s guileless king.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">If such o’erflowing grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Aaron’s vest e’en on the Sibyl ran,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why should we fear, the Son now lacks His place</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Where roams unchristen’d man?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though, where faith is keen, He cannot make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bread of the very stones, or thirst with ashes slake.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Messina</em>. <time datetime="1833-04-21"><em>April</em> 21, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="taormini" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Taormini</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
				<p>“And Jacob went on his way, and the Angels of God met him.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Say</strong>, hast thou track’d a traveller’s round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor visions met thee there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou couldst but marvel to have found</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This blighted world so fair?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And feel an awe within thee rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That sinful man should see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glories far worthier Seraph’s eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than to be shared by thee?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Store them in heart! thou shalt not faint</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">‘Mid coming pains and fears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the third heaven once nerved a Saint</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For fourteen trial-years.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Magnisi</em>. <time datetime="1833-04-26"><em>April</em> 26, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="sympathy" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVIII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Sympathy</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Souls</strong> of the Just, I call not you</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To share this joy with me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This joy and wonder at the view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of mountain, plain, and sea;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ye, on that loftier mountain old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Safe lodged in Eden’s cell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence run the rivers four, behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This earth, as ere it fell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Or, when ye think of those who stay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Still tried by the world’s fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis but in looking for the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which shall the lost unite.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ye rather, elder Spirits strong!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who from the first have trod</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This nether scene, man’s race among,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The while you live to God,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ye see, and ye can sympathize⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vain thought! their mighty ken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fills height and depth, the stars, the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They smile at dim-eyed men.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah, Saviour! I perforce am Thine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Angel and Saint apart:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those searching Eyes are all-divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All-human is that Heart.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Agosta</em>. <time datetime="1833-04-29"><em>April</em> 29, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="relics-of-saints" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIX</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Relics of Saints</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
				<p>“He is not the God of the dead, but of the living; for all live unto Him.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<span>“<strong>The</strong> Fathers are in dust, yet live to God:”⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So says the Truth; as if the motionless clay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still held the seeds of life beneath the sod,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Smouldering and struggling till the judgment-day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And hence we learn with reverence to esteem</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of these frail houses, though the grave confines;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sophist may urge his cunning tests, and deem</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That they are earth;⁠—but they are heavenly shrines.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Palermo</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-01"><em>June</em> 1, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="day-labourers" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXX</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Day-Labourers</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
				<p>“And He said, It is finished.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<span><strong>One</strong> only, of God’s messengers to man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finish’d the work of grace, which He began;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>E’en Moses wearied upon Nebo’s height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Though loth to leave the fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the doom’d foe, and yield the sun-bright land</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To Joshua’s armèd hand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And David wrought in turn a strenuous part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Zeal for God’s house consuming him in heart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet he might not build, but only bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Gifts for the Heavenly King;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And these another rear’d, his peaceful son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Till the full work was done.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>List, Christian warrior! thou, whose soul is fain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rid thy Mother of her present chain;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Christ will avenge His Bride; yea, even now</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Begins the work, and thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shalt spend in it thy strength, but, ere He save,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Thy lot shall be the grave.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Palermo</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-02"><em>June</em> 2, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="warfare" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXI</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Warfare</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
				<p>“Freely ye have received; freely give.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<span class="i4">“<strong>Give</strong> any boon for peace!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why should our fair-eyed Mother e’er engage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the world’s course and on a troubled stage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From which her very call is a release?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">No! in thy garden stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">And tend with pious hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">The flowers thou plantest there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Which are thy proper care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O man of God! in meekness and in love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And waiting for the blissful realms above.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i4">Alas! for thou must learn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou guileless one! rough is the holy hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Runs not the Word of Truth through every land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sword to sever, and a fire to burn?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">If blessèd Paul had stay’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">In cot or learned shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">With the priest’s white attire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">And the Saints’ tuneful choir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men had not gnash’d their teeth, nor risen to slay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">But thou hadst been a heathen in thy day.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Palermo</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-03"><em>June</em> 3, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="sacrilege" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Sacrilege</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>The</strong> Church shone brightly in her youthful days</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Ere the world on her smiled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So now, an outcast, she would pour her rays</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Keen, free, and undefiled:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet would I not that arm of force were mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which thrusts her from her awful ancient shrine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Twas duty bound each convert-king to rear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">His Mother from the dust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pious was it to enrich, nor fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Christ for the rest to trust;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And who shall dare make common or unclean</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What once has on the Holy Altar been?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Dear brothers!⁠—hence, while ye for ill prepare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Triumph is still your own;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blest is a pilgrim Church!⁠—yet shrink to share</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">The curse of throwing down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So will we toil in our old place to stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Watching, not dreading, the despoiler’s hand.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Palermo</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-04"><em>June</em> 4, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="liberalism" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Liberalism</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
				<p>“Jehu destroyed Baal out of Israel. Howbeit from the sins of Jeroboam Jehu departed not from after them, to wit, the golden calves that were in Bethel, and that were in Dan.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Ye</strong> cannot halve the Gospel of God’s grace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Men of presumptuous heart! I know you well.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ye are of those who plan that we should dwell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each in his tranquil home and holy place;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeing the Word refines all natures rude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tames the stirrings of the multitude.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And ye have caught some echoes of its lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As heralded amid the joyous choirs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ye mark’d it spoke of peace, chastised desires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good-will and mercy⁠—and ye heard no more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, as for zeal and quick-eyed sanctity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the dread depths of grace, ye pass’d them by.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And so ye halve the Truth; for ye in heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At best, are doubters whether it be true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The theme discarding, as unmeet for you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Statesmen or Sages. O new-compass’d art</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the ancient Foe!⁠—but what, if it extends</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er our own camp, and rules amid our friends?</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Palermo</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-05"><em>June</em> 5, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="declension" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIV</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Declension</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>When</strong> I am sad, I say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“What boots it me to strive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And vex my spirit day by day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dead memories to revive?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Alas! what good will come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though we our prayer obtain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bring old times triumphant home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wandering flocks regain?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Would not our history run</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the same weary round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And service in meek faith begun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At length in forms be bound?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Union would give us strength⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That strength the earth subdue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then comes wealth, and pride at length,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sloth, and prayers untrue.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nay, this is worldly-wise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To reason is a crime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since the Lord bade His Church arise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the dark ancient time.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He wills that she should shine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So we her flame must trim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around His soul-converting Sign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And leave the rest to Him.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Palermo</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-06"><em>June</em> 6, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-age-to-come" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXV</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Age to Come</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>When</strong> I would search the truths that in me burn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And mould them into rule and argument,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hundred reasoners cried⁠—“Hast thou to learn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those dreams are scatter’d now, those fires are spent?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, did I mount to simpler thoughts, and try</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some theme of peace, ’twas still the same reply.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Perplex’d, I hoped my heart was pure of guile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But judged me weak in wit, to disagree;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now, I see that men are mad awhile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis the old history⁠—Truth without a home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Despised and slain, then rising from the tomb.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Palermo</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-09"><em>June</em> 9, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="external-religion" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVI</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">External Religion</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>When</strong> first earth’s rulers welcomed home</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Church, their zeal impress’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the seasons, as they come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The image of their guest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Men’s words and works, their hopes and fears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Henceforth forbid to rove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Paused, when a Martyr claim’d her tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or Saint inspired her love.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But craving wealth, and feverish power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such service now discard;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The loss of one excited hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A sacrifice too hard!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And e’en about the holiest day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">God’s own in every time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They doubt and search, lest aught should stay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A cataract of crime.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Where shall this cease? must crosiers fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shrines suffer touch profane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till, cast without His vineyard wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Heaven-sent Heir is slain?</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Palermo</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-11"><em>June</em> 11, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="st-gregory-nazianzen" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>St.</abbr> Gregory Nazianzen</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Peace-loving</strong> man, of humble heart and true</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">What dost thou here?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fierce is the city’s crowd; the lordly few</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Are dull of ear!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sore pain it was to thee⁠—till thou didst quit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy patriarch-throne at length, as though for power unfit.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So works the All-wise! our services dividing</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Not as we ask:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the world’s profit, by our gifts deciding</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Our duty-task.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See in king’s courts loth Jeremias plead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slow-tongued Moses rule by eloquence of deed!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yes! thou, bright Angel of the East! didst rear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">The Cross divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Borne high upon thy liquid accents, where</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Men mock’d the Sign;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till that cold city heard thy battle-cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hearts were stirr’d, and deem’d a Pentecost was nigh.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou couldst a people raise, but couldst not rule:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">So, gentle one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaven set thee free⁠—for, ere thy years were full,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Thy work was done;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>According thee the lot thou lovedst best,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To muse upon the past⁠—to serve, yet be at rest.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Palermo</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-12"><em>June</em> 12, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-good-samaritan" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVIII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Good Samaritan</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span class="i3"><strong>Oh</strong> that thy creed were sound!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8" id="noteref-8" epub:type="noteref">8</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thou dost soothe the heart, thou Church of Rome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By thy unwearied watch and varied round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of service, in thy Saviour’s holy home.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I cannot walk the city’s sultry streets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But the wide porch invites to still retreats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where passion’s thirst is calm’d, and care’s unthankful gloom.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i3">There, on a foreign shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The home-sick solitary finds a friend:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thoughts, prison’d long for lack of speech, outpour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their tears; and doubts in resignation end.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I almost fainted from the long delay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That tangles me within this languid bay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When comes a foe, my wounds with oil and wine to tend.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Palermo</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-13"><em>June</em> 13, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="reverence" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIX</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Reverence</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>I <strong>bow</strong> at Jesu’s name, for ’tis the Sign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of awful mercy towards a guilty line.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of shameful ancestry, in birth defiled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">And upwards from a child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full of unlovely thoughts and rebel aims</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">And scorn of judgment-flames,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How without fear can I behold my Life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Just assailing sin, and death-stain’d in the strife?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And so, albeit His woe is our release,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thought of that woe aye dims our earthly peace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Life is hidden in a Fount of Blood!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">And this is tidings good</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For souls, who, pierced that they have caused that woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Are fain to share it too:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But for the many, clinging to their lot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of worldly ease and sloth, ’tis written “Touch Me not.”</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Off Monte Pelegrino</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-14"><em>June</em> 14, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-pillar-of-the-cloud" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XC</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Pillar of the Cloud</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Lead</strong>, Kindly Light, amid the encircling gloom</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Lead Thou me on!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The night is dark, and I am far from home⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Lead Thou me on!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Keep Thou my feet; I do not ask to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The distant scene⁠—one step enough for me.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I was not ever thus, nor pray’d that Thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Shouldst lead me on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I loved to choose and see my path, but now</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Lead Thou me on!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I loved the garish day, and, spite of fears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pride ruled my will: remember not past years.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So long Thy power hath blest me, sure it still</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Will lead me on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er moor and fen, o’er crag and torrent, till</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">The night is gone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with the morn those angel faces smile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which I have loved long since, and lost awhile.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>At Sea</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-16"><em>June</em> 16, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="samaria" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCI</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Samaria</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>O <strong>rail</strong> not at our kindred in the North,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Albeit Samaria finds her likeness there;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A self-form’d Priesthood, and the Church cast forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To the chill mountain air.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What, though their fathers sinned, and lost the grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which seals the Holy Apostolic Line?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Christ’s love o’erflows the bounds his Prophets trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In His reveal’d design.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Israel had Seers; to them the Word is nigh;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall not that Word run forth, and gladness give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To many a Shunammite, till in His eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The full Seven-thousand live?</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Off Sardinia</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-17"><em>June</em> 17, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="jonah" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Jonah</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
				<p>“But Jonah rose up to flee unto Tarshish, from the presence of the Lord.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Deep</strong> in his meditative bower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The tranquil seer reclined;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Numbering the creepers of an hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The gourds which o’er him twined.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To note each plant, to rear each fruit</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which soothes the languid sense,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He deem’d a safe, refined pursuit⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His Lord, an indolence.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The sudden voice was heard at length,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Lift thou the prophet’s rod!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But sloth had sapp’d the prophet’s strength,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He fear’d, and fled from God.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Next, by a fearful judgment tamed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He threats the offending race;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God spares;⁠—he murmurs, pride-inflamed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His threat made void by grace.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What?⁠—pride and sloth! man’s worst of foes!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And can such guests invade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our choicest bliss, the green repose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the sweet garden-shade?</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Off Sardinia</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-18"><em>June</em> 18, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="faith-against-sight" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCIII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Faith Against Sight</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
				<p>“As it was in the days of Lot, so shall it be also in the day of the Son of Man.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<span><strong>The</strong> world has cycles in its course, when all</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That once has been, is acted o’er again:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not by some fated law, which need appal</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our faith, or binds our deeds as with a chain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But by men’s separate sins, which blended still</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">The same bad round fulfil.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then fear ye not, though Gallio’s scorn ye see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And soft-clad nobles count you mad, true hearts!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These are the fig-tree’s signs;⁠—rough deeds must be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Trials and crimes: so learn ye well your parts.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once more to plough the earth it is decreed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">And scatter wide the seed.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Off Sardinia</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-18"><em>June</em> 18, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="desolation" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCIV</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Desolation</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>O, <strong>say</strong> not thou art left of God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because His tokens in the sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou canst not read: this earth He trod</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To teach thee He was ever nigh.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He sees, beneath the fig-tree green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nathaniel con His sacred lore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouldst thou thy chamber seek, unseen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He enters through the unopen’d door.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And when thou liest, by slumber bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Outwearied in the Christian fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In glory, girt with Saints around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He stands above thee through the night.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When friends to Emmaus bend their course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He joins, although He holds their eyes:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, shouldst thou feel some fever’s force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He takes thy hand, He bids thee rise.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Or on a voyage, when calms prevail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And prison thee upon the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He walks the wave, He wings the sail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The shore is gain’d, and thou art free.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Off Sardinia</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-18"><em>June</em> 18, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="zeal-and-patience" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCV</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Zeal and Patience</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
				<p>“I, Paul, the prisoner of the Lord.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<span>O <strong>comrade</strong> bold of toil and pain!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy trial how severe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When sever’d first by prisoner’s chain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From thy loved labour-sphere!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Say, did impatience first impel</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The heaven-sent bond to break?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, couldst thou bear its hindrance well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Loitering for Jesu’s sake?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Oh, might we know! for sore we feel</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The languor of delay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When sickness lets our fainter zeal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or foes block up our way.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lord! who Thy thousand years dost wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To work the thousandth part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Thy vast plan, for us create</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With zeal a patient heart.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Off Sardinia</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-19"><em>June</em> 19, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-religion-of-cain" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCVI</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Religion of Cain</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
				<p>“Am I my brother’s keeper?”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<span><strong>The</strong> time has been, it seem’d a precept plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the true faith, Christ’s tokens to display;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in life’s commerce still the thought retain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That men have souls, and wait a judgment-day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Kings used their gifts as ministers of heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor stripp’d their zeal for God, of means which God had given.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">’Tis alter’d now;⁠—for Adam’s eldest born</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Has train’d our practice in a selfish rule,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each stands alone, Christ’s bonds asunder torn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Each has his private thought, selects his school,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Conceals his creed, and lives in closest tie</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of fellowship with those who count it blasphemy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Brothers! spare reasoning;⁠—men have settled long</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That ye are out of date, and they are wise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Use their own weapons; let your words be strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Your cry be loud, till each scared boaster flies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thus the Apostles tamed the pagan breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They argued not, but preach’d; and conscience did the rest.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Off Sardinia</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-19"><em>June</em> 19, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="st-paul" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCVII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>St.</abbr> Paul</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>I <strong>dream’d</strong> that, with a passionate complaint,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I wish’d me born amid God’s deeds of might;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And envied those who had the presence bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of gifted Prophet and strong-hearted Saint,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom my heart loves, and Fancy strives to paint.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I turn’d, when straight a stranger met my sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Came as my guest, and did awhile unite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His lot with mine, and lived without restraint.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Courteous he was, and grave⁠—so meek in mien,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It seem’d untrue, or told a purpose weak;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, in the mood, he could with aptness speak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or with stern force, or show of feelings keen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Marking deep craft, methought, or hidden pride:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then came a voice⁠—“<abbr>St.</abbr> Paul is at thy side.”</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Off Sardinia</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-20"><em>June</em> 20, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="flowers-without-fruit" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCVIII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Flowers Without Fruit</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Prune</strong> thou thy words, the thoughts control</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That o’er thee swell and throng;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They will condense within thy soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And change to purpose strong.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But he who lets his feelings run</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In soft luxurious flow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shrinks when hard service must be done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And faints at every woe.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Faith’s meanest deed more favour bears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where hearts and wills are weigh’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than brightest transports, choicest prayers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which bloom their hour and fade.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Off Sardinia</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-20"><em>June</em> 20, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="zeal-and-meekness" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCIX</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Zeal and Meekness</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Christ</strong> bade His followers take the sword;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And yet He chid the deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Peter seized upon His word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And made a foe to bleed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The gospel Creed, a sword of strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Meek hands alone may rear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ever Zeal begins its life</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In silent thought and fear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ye, who would weed the Vineyard’s soil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Treasure the lesson given;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest in the judgment-books ye toil</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For Satan, not for heaven.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Off Sardinia</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-20"><em>June</em> 20, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="vexations" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">C</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Vexations</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span class="i1"><strong>Each</strong> trial has its weight; which, whoso bears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Knows his own woe, and need of succouring grace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The martyr’s hope half wipes away the trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of flowing blood; the while life’s humblest cares</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smart more, because they hold in Holy Writ no place.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">This be my comfort, in these days of grief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Which is not Christ’s, nor forms heroic tale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Apart from Him, if not a sparrow fail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May not He pitying view, and send relief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When foes or friends perplex, and peevish thoughts prevail?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Then keep good heart, nor take the niggard course</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of Thomas, who must see ere he would trust.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Faith will fill up God’s word, not poorly just</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the bare letter, heedless of its force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But walking by its light amid earth’s sun and dust.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Off Sardinia</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-21"><em>June</em> 21, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-church-in-prayer" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CI</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Church in Prayer</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Why</strong> loiterest within Simon’s walls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hard by the barren sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou Saint! when many a sinner calls</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To preach and set him free?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Can this be he, who erst confess’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For Christ affection keen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now truant in untimely rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mood of an Essene?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet he who at the sixth hour sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The lone house-top to pray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There gain’d a sight beyond his thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The dawn of Gentile day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then reckon not, when perils lour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The time of prayer mis-spent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor meanest chance, nor place, nor hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Without its heavenward bent.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Off Sardinia</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-21"><em>June</em> 21, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-wrath-to-come" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Wrath to Come</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
				<p>“From His mouth came out a sharp two-edged sword.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<span><strong>When</strong> first God stirr’d me, and the Church’s word</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Came as a theme of reverent search and fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It little cost to own the lustre clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of truths she taught, and rite and rule she stored;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For conscience craved, and reason did accord.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet one there was that wore a mien austere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And I did doubt, and, startled, ask’d to hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose mouth had force to edge so sharp a sword.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My mother oped her trust, the holy Book;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And heal’d my pang. She pointed, and I found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Christ on Himself, considerate Master, took</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The utterance of that doctrine’s fearful sound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Fount of Love His servants sends to tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love’s deeds; Himself reveals the sinner’s hell.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Off Sardinia</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-21"><em>June</em> 21, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="pusillanimity" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXX</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Pusillanimity</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
				<p>“I have need to be baptized of Thee, and comest Thou to me?”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<span><strong>How</strong> didst thou start, Thou Holy Baptist, bid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To pour repentance on the Sinless Brow!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then all thy meekness, from thy hearers hid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath the Ascetic’s port, and Preacher’s fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flow’d forth, and with a pang thou didst desire</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">He might be chief, not thou.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And so on us at whiles it falls, to claim</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Powers that we dread, or dare some forward part;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor must we shrink as cravens from the blame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of pride, in common eyes, or purpose deep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But with pure thoughts look up to God, and keep</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Our secret in our heart.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>At Sea</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-22"><em>June</em> 22, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="james-and-john" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CIV</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">James and John</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Two</strong> brothers freely cast their lot</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With David’s royal Son;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cost of conquest counting not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They deem the battle won.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Brothers in heart, they hope to gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">An undivided joy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That man may one with man remain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As boy was one with boy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Christ heard; and will’d that James should fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">First prey of Satan’s rage;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>John linger out his fellows all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And die in bloodless age.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now they join hands once more above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before the Conqueror’s throne;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus God grants prayer, but in His love</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Makes times and ways His own.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>At Sea</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-22"><em>June</em> 22, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="hora-novissima" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CV</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Hora Novissima</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Whene’er</strong> goes forth Thy dread command,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And my last hour is nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lord, grant me in a Christian land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As I was born, to die.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I pray not, Lord, that friends may be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or kindred, standing by⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Choice blessing! which I leave to Thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To grant me or deny.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But let my failing limbs beneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My Mother’s smile recline;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And prayers sustain my labouring breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From out her sacred shrine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And let the cross beside my bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In its dread Presence rest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let the absolving words be said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To ease a laden breast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou, Lord, where’er we lie, canst aid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But He, who taught His own</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To live as one, will not upbraid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The dread to die alone.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>At Sea</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-22"><em>June</em> 22, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="progress-of-unbelief" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CVI</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Progress of Unbelief</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Now</strong> is the Autumn of the Tree of Life;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its leaves are shed upon the unthankful earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which lets them whirl, a prey to the winds’ strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heartless to store them for the months of dearth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Men close the door, and dress the cheerful hearth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Self-trusting still; and in his comely gear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of precept and of rite, a household Baal rear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But I will out amid the sleet, and view</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each shrivelling stalk and silent-falling leaf.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Truth after truth, of choicest scent and hue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fades, and in fading stirs the Angels’ grief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unanswer’d here; for she, once pattern chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of faith, my Country, now gross hearted grown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waits but to burn the stem before her idol’s throne.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>At Sea</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-23"><em>June</em> 23, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="consolation" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CVII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Consolation</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
				<p>“It is I; be not afraid.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<span><strong>When</strong> I sink down in gloom or fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hope blighted or delay’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy whisper, Lord, my heart shall cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“ ’Tis I; be not afraid!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Or, startled at some sudden blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If fretful thoughts I feel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Fear not, it is but I!” shall flow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As balm my wound to heal.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nor will I quit Thy way, though foes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some onward pass defend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From each rough voice the watchword goes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Be not afraid!⁠ ⁠… a friend!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And oh! when judgment’s trumpet clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Awakes me from the grave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still in its echo may I hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“ ’Tis Christ; He comes to save.”</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>At Sea</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-23"><em>June</em> 23, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="uzzah-and-obed-edom" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CVIII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Uzzah and Obed-Edom</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>The</strong> ark of God has hidden strength;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who reverence or profane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They, or their seed, shall find at length</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The penalty or gain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>While as a sojourner it sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of old its destined place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A blessing on the home it brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of one who did it grace.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But there was one, outstripping all</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The holy-vestured band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who laid on it, to save its fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A rude corrective hand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Read, who the Church would cleanse, and mark</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How stern the warning runs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There are two ways to aid her ark⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As patrons, and as sons.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>At Sea</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-24"><em>June</em> 24, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-gift-of-tongues" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CIX</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Gift of Tongues</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Once</strong> cast with men of language strange</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And foreign-moulded creed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I mark’d their random converse change,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sacred themes succeed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Oh, how I coveted the gift</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To thread their mingled throng</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sounds, then high my witness lift!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But weakness chain’d my tongue.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lord! has our dearth of faith and prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lost us this power once given,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or is it sent at seasons rare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And then flits back to heaven?</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>At Sea</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-24"><em>June</em> 24, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-power-of-prayer" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CX</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Power of Prayer</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>There</strong> is not on the earth a soul so base</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">But may obtain a place</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">In covenanted grace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that his feeble prayer of faith obtains</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Some loosening of his chains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And earnests of the great release, which rise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From gift to gift, and reach at length the eternal prize.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All may save self;⁠—but minds that heavenward tower</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Aim at a wider power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Gifts on the world to shower.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this is not at once;⁠—by fastings gain’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">And trials well sustain’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By pureness, righteous deeds, and toils of love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abidance in the Truth, and zeal for God above.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>At Sea</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-24"><em>June</em> 24, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="semita-justorum" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXI</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Semita Justorum</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>When</strong> I look back upon my former race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seasons I see at which the Inward Ray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">More brightly burn’d, or guided some new way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Truth, in its wealthier scene and nobler space</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Given for my eye to range, and feet to trace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And next I mark, ’twas trial did convey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or grief, or pain, or strange eventful day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To my tormented soul such larger grace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So now, whene’er, in journeying on, I feel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shadow of the Providential Hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep breathless stirrings shoot across my breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Searching to know what He will now reveal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What sin uncloak, what stricter rule command,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And girding me to work His full behest.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>At Sea</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-25"><em>June</em> 25, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-elements" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXII</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Elements</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">(A Tragic Chorus.)</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span class="i1"><strong>Man</strong> is permitted much</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To scan and learn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In Nature’s frame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till he well-nigh can tame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brute mischiefs and can touch</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Invisible things, and turn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All warring ills to purposes of good.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Thus, as a god below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">He can control,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And harmonize, what seems amiss to flow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As sever’d from the whole</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And dimly understood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">But o’er the elements</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">One Hand alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">One Hand has sway.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What influence day by day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In straiter belt prevents</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The impious Ocean, thrown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alternate o’er the ever-sounding shore?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or who has eye to trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">How the Plague came?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forerun the doublings of the Tempest’s race?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or the Air’s weight and flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On a set scale explore?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Thus God has will’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That man, when fully skill’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still gropes in twilight dim;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Encompass’d all his hours</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By fearfullest powers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Inflexible to him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That so he may discern</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His feebleness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And e’en for earth’s success</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him in wisdom turn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who holds for us the keys of either home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth and the world to come.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>At Sea</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-25"><em>June</em> 25, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="apostacy" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXIII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Apostacy</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>France</strong>! I will think of thee as what thou wast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When Poictiers show’d her zeal for the true creed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or in that age, when Holy Truth, though cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On a rank soil, yet was a thriving seed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy schools within, from neighbouring countries chased;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">E’en of thy pagan day I bear to read,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy Martyrs sanctified the guilty host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Sons of blessèd John, rear’d on a western coast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I dare not think of thee as what thou art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lest thoughts too deep for man should trouble me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is not safe to place the mind and heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On brink of evil, or its flames to see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest they should dizzy, or some taint impart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or to our sin a fascination be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so in silence I will now proclaim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hate of thy present self, and scarce will sound thy name.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-9" id="noteref-9" epub:type="noteref">9</a></span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Off the French coast</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-26"><em>June</em> 26, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="judaism" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXIV</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Judaism</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">(A Tragic Chorus.)</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span class="i4">O <strong>piteous</strong> race!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Fearful to look upon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Once standing in high place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Heaven’s eldest son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">O aged blind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unvenerable! as thou flittest by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I liken thee to him in pagan song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">In thy gaunt majesty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The vagrant King, of haughty-purposed mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Whom prayer nor plague could bend;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-10" id="noteref-10" epub:type="noteref">10</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrong’d, at the cost of him who did the wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Accursed himself, but in his cursing strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And honour’d in his end.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i4">O Abraham! sire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Shamed in thy progeny;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Who to thy faith aspire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Thy Hope deny.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Well wast thou given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From out the heathen an adopted heir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raised strangely from the dead when sin had slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Thy former-cherish’d care.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O holy men, ye first-wrought gems of heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Polluted in your kin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come to our fonts, your lustre to regain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Holiest Lord!⁠ ⁠… but Thou canst take no stain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Of blood, or taint of sin.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i4">Twice in their day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Proffer of precious cost</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Was made, Heaven’s hand to stay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Ere all was lost.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">The first prevail’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Moses was outcast from the promised home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For his own sin, yet taken at his prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">To change his people’s doom.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Close on their eve, one other ask’d and fail’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">When fervent Paul was fain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The accursèd tree, as Christ had borne, to bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No hopeful answer came⁠—a Price more rare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Already shed in vain.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Off Marseilles Harbour</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-27"><em>June</em> 27, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="separation-of-friends" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXV</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Separation of Friends</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Do</strong> not their souls, who ’neath the Altar wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until their second birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gift of patience need, as separate</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From their first friends of earth?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not that earth’s blessings are not all outshone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Eden’s Angel flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that earth knows not yet, the Dead has won</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That crown, which was his aim.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For when he left it, ’twas a twilight scene</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">About his silent bier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A breathless struggle, faith and sight between,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Hope and sacred Fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fear startled at his pains and dreary end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hope raised her chalice high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the twin-sisters still his shade attend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">View’d in the mourner’s eye.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So day by day for him from earth ascends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As steam in summer-even,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The speechless intercession of his friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Toward the azure heaven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah dearest, with a word he could dispel</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All questioning, and raise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our hearts to rapture, whispering all was well</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And turning prayer to praise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And other secrets too he could declare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By patterns all divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His earthly creed retouching here and there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And deepening every line.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dearest! he longs to speak, as I to know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And yet we both refrain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It were not good: a little doubt below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all will soon be plain.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-11" id="noteref-11" epub:type="noteref">11</a></span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Marseilles</em>. <time datetime="1833-06-27"><em>June</em> 27, 1833.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-priestly-office" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXVI</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Priestly Office</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="subtitle">From <abbr>St.</abbr> Gregory Nazianzen</h4>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>In</strong> service o’er the Mystic Feast I stand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I cleanse Thy victim-flock, and bring them near</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In holiest wise, and by a bloodless rite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">O fire of Love! O gushing Fount of Light!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(As best I know, who need Thy pitying Hand)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dread office this, bemired souls to clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of their defilement, and again made bright.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Oxford</em>. <time datetime="1834">1834.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="morning" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXVII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Morning</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="subtitle">From <abbr>St.</abbr> Gregory Nazianzen</h4>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>I <strong>rise</strong> and raise my clasped hands to Thee!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Henceforth, the darkness hath no part in me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Thy sacrifice this day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abiding firm, and with a freeman’s might</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stemming the waves of passion in the fight;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Ah, should I from Thee stray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My hoary head, Thy table where I bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will be my shame, which are mine honour now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus I set out;⁠—Lord! lead me on my way!</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Oxford</em>. <time datetime="1834">1834.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="evening" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXVIII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Evening</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="subtitle">From <abbr>St.</abbr> Gregory Nazianzen</h4>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>O <strong>Holiest</strong> Truth! how have I lied to Thee!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I vow’d this day Thy festival should be:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">But I am dim ere night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surely I made my prayer, and I did deem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I could keep in me Thy morning beam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Immaculate and bright.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But my foot slipp’d; and, as I lay, he came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My gloomy foe, and robbed me of heaven’s flame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Help Thou my darkness, Lord, till I am light.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Oxford</em>. <time datetime="1834">1834.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="a-hermitage" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXIX</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">A Hermitage</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="subtitle">From <abbr>St.</abbr> Gregory Nazianzen</h4>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Some</strong> one whisper’d yesterday,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the rich and fashionable,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gregory in his own small way</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Easy was and comfortable.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Had he not of wealth his fill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom a garden gay did bless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a gently trickling rill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the sweets of idleness?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I made answer:⁠—“Is it ease</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fasts to keep and tears to shed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vigil hours and wounded knees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Call you these a pleasant bed?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus a veritable monk</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Does to death his fleshly frame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be there who in sloth are sunk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They have forfeited the name.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Oxford</em>. <time datetime="1834">1834.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-married-and-the-single" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXX</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Married and the Single</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="subtitle">A Fragment from <abbr>St.</abbr> Gregory Nazianzen</h4>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>As</strong>, when the hand some mimic form would paint,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It marks its purpose first in shadows faint,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And next, its store of varied hues applies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till outlines fade, and the full limbs arise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So in the earlier school of sacred lore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Virgin-life no claim of honour bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While in Religion’s youth the Law held sway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And traced in symbols dim that better way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, when the Christ came by a Virgin-birth⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His radiant passage from high heaven to earth⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, spurning father for His mortal state,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did Eve and all her daughters consecrate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Solved fleshly laws, and in the letter’s place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave us the Spirit and the Word of Grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then shone the glorious Celibate at length,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Robed in the dazzling lightnings of its strength,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surpassing spells of earth and marriage vow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As soul the body, heaven this world below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eternal peace of saints life’s troubled span,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the high throne of God, the haunts of man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So now there circles round the King of Light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A heaven on earth, a blameless court and bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aiming as emblems of their God to shine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Christ in their heart, and on their brow His Sign⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soft funeral lights in the world’s twilight dim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loving their God, and ever loved by Him.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ye countless multitudes, content to bow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the soft thraldom of the marriage vow!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I mark your haughty step, your froward gaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gems deck your hair, and silk your limbs arrays;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, tell the gain which wedlock has conferr’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On man; and then the single shall be heard.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The married many thus might plead, I ween;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right glib their tongue, full confident their mien:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hear all who live! to whom the nuptial rite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has brought the privilege of life and light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We, who are wedded, but the law obey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stamp’d at creation on our blood and clay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What time the Demiurge our line began,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oped Adam’s side, and out of man drew man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thenceforth let children of a mortal sod</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honour the law of earth, the primal law of God.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“List, you shall hear the gifts of price that lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gathered and bound within the marriage-tie.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What taught the arts of life, the truths which sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In earth, or highest heaven, or vasty deep?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What fill’d the mart, and urged the vessel brave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To link in one fair countries o’er the wave?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What raised the town? what gave the type and germ</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of social union, and of sceptre firm?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What the first husbandman, the glebe to plough,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rear the garden, but the marriage vow?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Nay, list again! Who seek its kindly chain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A second self, a double presence gain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hands, eyes, and ears, to act or suffer here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till e’en the weak inspire both love and fear⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A comrade’s sigh, to soothe when cares annoy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A comrade’s smile, to elevate his joy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Nor say it weds us to a carnal life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When want is urgent, fears and vows are rife.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light heart is his, who has no yoke at home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scant prayer for blessings, as the seasons come;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But wife, and offspring, goods which go or stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Teach us our need, and make us trust and pray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take love away, and life would be defaced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A ghastly vision on a howling waste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stern, heartless, reft of the sweet spells which swage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The throes of passion, and which gladden age.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No child’s sweet pranks, once more to make us young;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No ties of place about our heart-strings flung;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No public haunts to cheer; no festive tide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When harmless mirth and smiling wit preside;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A life which scorns the gifts by heaven assign’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor knows the sympathy of human kind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Prophets and teachers, priests and victor kings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deck’d with each grace which heaven-taught nature brings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These were no giant offspring of the earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But to the marriage-promise owed their birth:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moses and Samuel, David, David’s Son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blessed Tishbite, the more blessed John,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sacred Twelve in apostolic choir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strong-hearted Paul, instinct with seraph fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And others, now or erst, who to high heaven aspire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bethink ye; should the single state be best,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet who the single, but my offspring blest?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My sons, be still, nor with your parents strive:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They coupled in their day, and so ye live.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Thus marriage pleads. Now let her rival speak⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dim is her downcast eye, and pale her cheek;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Untrimm’d her gear; no sandals on her feet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sparest form for austere tenant meet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She drops her veil her modest face around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And her lips open, but we hear no sound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will address her:⁠—“Hail, O child of Heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glorious within! to whom a post is given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hard by the Throne where angels bow and fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>E’en while thou hast a name and mission here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O deign thy voice, unveil thy brow and see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy ready guard and minister in me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oft hast thou come heaven-wafted to my breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bright Spirit! so come again, and give me rest.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>… “Ah, who has hither drawn my backward feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Changing for worldly strife my lone retreat?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where, in the silent chant of holy deeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I praise my God, and tend the sick soul’s needs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By toils of day, and vigils of the night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By gushing tears, and blessed lustral rite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have no sway amid the crowd, no art</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In speech, no place in council or in mart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor human law, nor judges throned on high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smile on my face, and to my words reply.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let others seek earth’s honours; be it mine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One law to cherish, and to track one line,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straight on towards heaven to press with single bent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To know and love my God, and then to die content.”</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Oxford</em>. <time datetime="1834">1834.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="intercession-of-the-saints" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXI</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Intercession of the Saints</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>While</strong> Moses on the Mountain lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Night after night, and day by day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Till forty suns were gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unconscious, in the Presence bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of lustrous day and starry night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though his soul had flitted quite</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">From earth, and Eden won;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The pageant of a kingdom vast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And things unutterable, pass’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Before the Prophet’s eye;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dread shadows of th’ Eternal Throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fount of Life, and Altar-stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pavement, and them that tread thereon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And those who worship nigh.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But lest he should his own forget,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who in the vale were struggling yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A sadder vision came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Announcing all that guilty deed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of idol rite, that in their need</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He for his flock might intercede,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And stay Heaven’s rising flame.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Oxford</em>. <time datetime="1835-09-04"><em>September</em> 4, 1835.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="waiting-for-the-morning" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Waiting for the Morning</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
				<p>
					<i xml:lang="la">“Quoddam quasi pratum, in quo animæ nihil patiebantur, sed manebant, nondum idoneæ Visioni Beatæ.”</i>
				</p>
				<cite>—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bedæ <abbr>Hist.</abbr></i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</cite>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<span class="i4"><strong>They</strong> are at rest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We may not stir the heaven of their repose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With loud-voiced grief, or passionate request,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Or selfish plaint for those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who in the mountain grots of Eden lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hear the fourfold river, as it hurries by.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i4">They hear it sweep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In distance down the dark and savage vale;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they at eddying pool or current deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Shall never more grow pale;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They hear, and meekly muse, as fain to know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How long untired, unspent, that giant stream shall flow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i4">And soothing sounds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blend with the neighbouring waters as they glide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Posted along the haunted garden’s bounds</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Angelic forms abide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Echoing, as words of watch, o’er lawn and grove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The verses of that hymn which Seraphs chant above.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Oxford</em>. <time datetime="1835">1835.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="matins-sunday-primo-die-quo-trinitas" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXIII</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Matins⁠—Sunday<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-12" id="noteref-12" epub:type="noteref">12</a></h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">
					<i xml:lang="la">Primo die, quo Trinitas.</i>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>To-day</strong> the Blessed Three in One</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Began the earth and skies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Today a Conqueror, God the Son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Did from the grave arise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We too will wake, and, in despite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sloth and languor, all unite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Psalmists bid, through the dim night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Waiting with wistful eyes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So may He hear, and heed each vow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And prayer to Him addrest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And grant an instant cleansing now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A future glorious rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So may He plentifully shower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On all who hymn His love and power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this most still and sacred hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His sweetest gifts and best.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Father of purity and light!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy presence if we win,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twill shield us from the deeds of night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The burning darts of sin;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest aught defiled or dissolute</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Relax our bodies or imbrute,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fires eternal be the fruit</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of fire now lit within.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Fix in our hearts, Redeemer dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The ever-gushing spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of grace to cleanse, of life to cheer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Souls sick and sorrowing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thee, bounteous Father, we entreat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Only Son, awful and sweet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And life-creating Paraclete,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The everlasting King.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="matins-sunday-nocte-surgentes" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXIV</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Matins⁠—Sunday</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">
					<i xml:lang="la">Nocte surgentes.</i>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Let</strong> us arise, and watch by night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And meditate always;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And chant, as in our Maker’s sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">United hymns of praise.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So, singing with the Saints in bliss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With them we may attain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Life everlasting after this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And heaven for earthly pain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Grant this, O Father, Only Son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Spirit, God of grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whom all worship shall be done</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In every time and place.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="matins-monday" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXV</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Matins⁠—Monday</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">
					<i xml:lang="la">Somno refectis artubus.</i>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Sleep</strong> has refresh’d our limbs, we spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From off our bed, and rise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lord, on Thy suppliants, while they sing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Look with a Father’s eyes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Be Thou the first on every tongue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The first in every heart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That at all our doings all day long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Holiest! from Thee may start.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Cleanse Thou the gloom, and bid the light</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its healing beams renew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sins, which have crept in with night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With night shall vanish too.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Our bosoms, Lord, unburthen Thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Let nothing there offend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That those who hymn Thy praises now</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May hymn them to the end.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Grant this, O Father, Only Son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Spirit, God of grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whom all worship shall be done</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In every time and place.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="matins-tuesday" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXVI</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Matins⁠—Tuesday</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">
					<i xml:lang="la">Consors Paterni luminis.</i>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>O <strong>God</strong> from God, and Light from Light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who art Thyself the day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our chants shall break the clouds of night;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be with us while we pray.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Chase Thou the gloom that haunts the mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The thronging shades of hell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sloth and drowsiness that bind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The senses with a spell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lord, to their sins indulgent be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who, in this hour forlorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By faith in what they do not see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With songs prevent the morn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Grant this, O Father, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="matins-wednesday" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXVII</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Matins⁠—Wednesday</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">
					<i xml:lang="la">Rerum Creator optime.</i>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Who</strong> madest all and dost control,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lord, with Thy touch divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast out the slumbers of the soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The rest that is not Thine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Look down, Eternal Holiness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And wash the sins away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of those, who, rising to confess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Outstrip the lingering day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Our hearts and hands by night, O Lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We lift them in our need;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As holy Psalmists give the word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And holy Paul the deed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Each sin to Thee of years gone by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Each hidden stain lies bare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We shrink not from Thine awful eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But pray that Thou wouldst spare.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Grant this, O Father, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="matins-thursday" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXVIII</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Matins⁠—Thursday</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">
					<i xml:lang="la">Nox atra rerum contegit.</i>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>All</strong> tender lights, all hues divine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The night has swept away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shine on us, Lord, and we shall shine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bright in an inward day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The spots of guilt, sin’s wages base,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Searcher of hearts, we own;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wash us and robe us in Thy grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who didst for sins atone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The sluggard soul, that bears their mark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shrinks in its silent lair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or gropes amid its chambers dark</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For Thee, who art not there.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Redeemer! send Thy piercing rays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That we may bear to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Set in the light of Thy pure gaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And yet rejoice in Thee.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Grant this, O Father, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="matins-friday" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXIX</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Matins⁠—Friday</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">
					<i xml:lang="la">Tu Trinitatis Unitas.</i>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>May</strong> the dread Three in One, who sways</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All with His sovereign might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Accept us for this hymn of praise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His watchers in the night.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For in the night, when all is still</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We spurn our bed and rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To find the balm for ghostly ill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His bounteous hand supplies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If e’er by night our envious foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With guilt our souls would stain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May the deep streams of mercy flow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And make us white again;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That so with bodies braced and bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hearts awake within,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All fresh and keen may burn our light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Undimm’d, unsoil’d by sin.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Shine on Thine own, Redeemer sweet!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy radiance increate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the long day shall keep our feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In their pure morning state.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Grant this, O Father, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="matins-saturday" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXX</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Matins⁠—Saturday</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">
					<i xml:lang="la">Summæ Parens clementiæ.</i>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Father</strong> of mercies infinite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ruling all things that be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, shrouded in the depth and height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Art One, and yet art Three;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Accept our chants, accept our tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A mingled stream we pour;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such stream the laden bosom cheers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To taste Thy sweetness more.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Purge Thou with fire the o’ercharged mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its sores and wounds profound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with the watcher’s girdle bind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The limbs which sloth has bound.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That they who with their chants by night</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before Thy presence come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All may be fill’d with strength and light</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From their eternal home.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Grant this, O Father, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="lauds-sunday-aeterne-rerum-conditor" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXXI</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Lauds⁠—Sunday</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">
					<i xml:lang="la">Æterne rerum conditor.</i>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Framer</strong> of the earth and sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ruler of the day and night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a glad variety,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tempering all, and making light;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Gleams upon our dark path flinging,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cutting short each night begun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hark! for chanticleer is singing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hark! he chides the lingering sun.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And the morning star replies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lets loose the imprison’d day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the godless bandit flies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From his haunt and from his prey.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Shrill it sounds, the storm relenting</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Soothes the weary seaman’s ears;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once it wrought a great repenting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that flood of Peter’s tears.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Rouse we; let the blithesome cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of that bird our hearts awaken;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chide the slumberers as they lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And arrest the sin-o’ertaken.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hope and health are in his strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the fearful and the ailing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Murder sheathes his blade profane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Faith revives when faith was failing.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Jesu, Master! when we sin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Turn on us Thy healing face;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It will melt the offence within</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into penitential grace:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Beam on our bewilder’d mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till its dreamy shadows flee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stones cry out where Thou hast shined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Jesu! musical with Thee.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To the Father and the Son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the Spirit, who in Heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever witness, Three and One,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Praise on Earth be ever given.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="lauds-sunday-ecce-jam-noctis" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXXII</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Lauds⁠—Sunday</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">
					<i xml:lang="la">Ecce jam noctis.</i>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Paler</strong> have grown the shades of night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And nearer draws the day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Checkering the sky with streaks of light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since we began to pray:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To pray for mercy when we sin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For cleansing and release,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For ghostly safety, and within</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For everlasting peace.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Praise to the Father, as is meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Praise to the Only Son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Praise to the Holy Paraclete,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While endless ages run.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="lauds-monday" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXXIII</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Lauds⁠—Monday</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">
					<i xml:lang="la">Splendor Paternæ gloriæ.</i>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Of</strong> the Father Effluence bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of Light evolving light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light from Light, unfailing Ray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Day creative of the day:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Truest Sun, upon us stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Thy calm perpetual beam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the Spirit’s still sunshine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Making sense and thought divine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Seek we too the Father’s face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Father of almighty grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of majesty excelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who can purge our tainted dwelling;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Who can aid us, who can break</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Teeth of envious foes, and make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hours of loss and pain succeed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guiding safe each duteous deed,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And infusing self-control,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fragrant chastity of soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Faith’s keen flame to soar on high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Incorrupt simplicity.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Christ Himself for food be given,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Faith become the cup of Heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of which the joy is quaff’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Spirit’s sobering draught.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With that joy replenishèd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Morn shall glow with modest red,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Noon with beaming faith be bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eve be soft without twilight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It has dawn’d;⁠—upon our way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Father in Thy Word, this day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Thy Father Word Divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Thy cloudy pillar shine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To the Father, and the Son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Spirit, Three and One,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As of old, and as in Heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now and here be glory given.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="lauds-tuesday" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXXIV</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Lauds⁠—Tuesday</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">
					<i xml:lang="la">Ales diei nuntius.</i>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span class="i2"><strong>Day’s</strong> herald bird</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">At length is heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telling its morning torch is lit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And small and still</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Christ’s accents thrill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the heart rekindling it.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">Away, He cries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">With languid eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sickly slumbers profitless!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">I am at hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">As watchers stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In awe, and truth, and holiness.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">He will appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The hearts to cheer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of suppliants pale and abstinent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who cannot sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because they weep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With holy grief and violent.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">Keep us awake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The fetters break,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jesu! which night has forged for us;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Yea, melt the night</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To sinless light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till all is bright and glorious.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">To Father, Son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And Spirit, One,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Most Holy Trinity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">All praise be given</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In Earth and Heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now, as of old, and endlessly.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="lauds-wednesday" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXXV</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Lauds⁠—Wednesday</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">
					<i xml:lang="la">Nox et tenebræ et nubila.</i>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Haunting</strong> gloom and flitting shades,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ghastly shapes, away!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Christ is rising, and pervades</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Highest Heaven with day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He with His bright spear the night</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dazzles and pursues;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth wakes up, and glows with light</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of a thousand hues.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thee, O Christ, and Thee alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With a single mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We with chant and plaint would own:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Thy flock be kind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Much it needs Thy light divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spot and stain to clean;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light of Angels, on us shine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Thy face serene.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To the Father, and the Son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the Holy Ghost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here be glory, as is done</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By the angelic host.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="lauds-thursday" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXXVI</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Lauds⁠—Thursday</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">
					<i xml:lang="la">Lux ecce surgit aurea.</i>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>See</strong>, the golden dawn is glowing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the paly shades are going,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which have led us far and long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a labyrinth of wrong.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>May it bring us peace serene;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May it cleanse, as it is clean;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plain and clear our words be spoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And our thoughts without a cloak;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So the day’s account, shall stand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guileless tongue and holy hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stedfast eyes and unbeguiled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Flesh as of a little child.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There is One who from above</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Watches how the still hours move</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of our day of service done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the dawn to setting sun.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To the Father, and the Son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Spirit, Three and One,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As of old, and as in Heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now and here be glory given.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="lauds-friday" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXXVII</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Lauds⁠—Friday</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">
					<i xml:lang="la">Æterna cœli gloria.</i>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Glory</strong> of the eternal Heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blessed Hope to mortals given,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Almighty Only Son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Virgin’s Holy One;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raise us, Lord, and we shall rise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In a sober mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a zeal, which glorifies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Thee from gratitude.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now the day-star, keenly glancing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tells us of the Sun’s advancing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the unhealthy shades decline,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rise within us, Light Divine!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rise, and, risen, go not hence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Stay, and make us bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Streaming through each cleansèd sense,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">On the outward night.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the root of faith shall spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the heart new fashionèd;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gladsome hope shall spring above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shall bear the fruit of love.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Father, and the Son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And the Holy Ghost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here be glory, as is done</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">By the angelic host.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="lauds-saturday" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXXVIII</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Lauds⁠—Saturday</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">
					<i xml:lang="la">Aurora jam spargit polum.</i>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>The</strong> dawn is sprinkled o’er the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The day steals softly on;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its darts are scatter’d far and nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all that fraudful is, shall fly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Before the brightening sun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spectres of ill, that stalk at will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And forms of guilt that fright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hideous sin, that ventures in</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Under the cloak of night.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And of our crimes the tale complete,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Which bows us in Thy sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up to the latest, they shall fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out-told by our full numbers sweet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And melted by the light.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To Father, Son, and Spirit, One,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Whom we adore and love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be given all praise, now and always,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Here as in Heaven above.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="prime" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXXIX</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Prim</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<span epub:type="bridgehead">
					<p>
						<i xml:lang="la">Jam lucis orto sidere.</i>
					</p>
					<p>(From the Parisian Breviary.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-13" id="noteref-13" epub:type="noteref">13</a>)</p>
				</span>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Now</strong> that the day-star glimmers bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We suppliantly pray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That He, the uncreated Light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May guide us on our way.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>No sinful word, nor deed of wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor thoughts that idly rove;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But simple truth be on our tongue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in our hearts be love.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And, while the hours in order flow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O Christ, securely fence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our gates, beleaguer’d by the foe⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The gate of every sense.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And grant that to Thine honour, Lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our daily toil may tend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That we begin it at Thy word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in Thy blessing end.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And, lest the flesh in its excess</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should lord it o’er the soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let taming abstinence repress</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The rebel, and control.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To God the Father glory be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to His Only Son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to the Spirit, One and Three,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While endless ages run.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Littlemore</em>. <time datetime="1842-02"><em>February</em>, 1842.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="terce" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXL</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Terce</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">
					<i xml:lang="la">Nunc Sancte nobis Spiritus.</i>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Come</strong>, Holy Ghost, who ever One</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reignest with Father and with Son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is the hour, our souls possess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Thy full flood of holiness.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Let flesh, and heart, and lips, and mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sound forth our witness to mankind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And love light up our mortal frame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till others catch the living flame.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now to the Father, to the Son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to the Spirit, Three in One,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be praise and thanks and glory given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By men on earth, by Saints in heaven.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="sext" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXLI</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Sext</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">
					<i xml:lang="la">Rector potens, verax Deus.</i>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>O <strong>God</strong>, who canst not change nor fail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Guiding the hours, as they roll by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bright’ning with beams the morning pale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And burning in the mid-day sky,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quench Thou the fires of hate and strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wasting fever of the heart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From perils guard our feeble life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And to our souls Thy peace impart.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Grant this, O Father, Only Son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Holy Spirit, God of grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whom all glory, Three in One,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be given in every time and place.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="none" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXLII</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">None</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">
					<i xml:lang="la">Rerum Deus tenax vigor.</i>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>O <strong>God</strong>, unchangeable and true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of all the Life and Power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dispensing light in silence through</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Every successive hour,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lord, brighten our declining day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That it may never wane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till death, when all things round decay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brings back the morn again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This grace on Thy redeem’d confer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Father, Co-equal Son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Holy Ghost, the Comforter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Eternal Three in One.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="vespers-sunday" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXLIII</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Vespers⁠—Sunday</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">
					<i xml:lang="la">Lucis Creator optime.</i>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Father</strong> of Lights, by whom each day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is kindled out of night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, when the heavens were made, didst lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their rudiments in light;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou, who didst bind and blend in one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The glistening morn and evening pale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hear Thou our plaint, when light is gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And lawlessness and strife prevail.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hear, lest the whelming weight of crime</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wreck us with life in view;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest thoughts and schemes of sense and time</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Earn us a sinner’s due.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So may we knock at Heaven’s door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And strive the immortal prize to win,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Continually and evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Guarded without and pure within.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Grant this, O Father, Only Son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Spirit, God of grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whom all worship shall be done</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In every time and place.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="vespers-monday" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXLIV</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Vespers⁠—Monday</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">
					<i xml:lang="la">Immense cœli conditor.</i>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span class="i1"><strong>Lord</strong> of unbounded space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Who, lest the sky and main</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should mix, and heaven should lose its place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Didst the rude waters chain;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Parting the moist and rare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That rills on earth might flow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To soothe the angry flame, whene’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">It ravens from below;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Pour on us of Thy grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The everlasting spring;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest our frail steps renew the trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of the ancient wandering.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">May faith in lustre grow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And rear her star in heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Paling all sparks of earth below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Unquench’d by damps of even.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Grant it, O Father, Son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And Holy Spirit of grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whom be glory, Three in One,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In every time and place.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="vespers-tuesday" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXLV</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Vespers⁠—Tuesday</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">
					<i xml:lang="la">Telluris alme conditor.</i>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>All-bountiful</strong> Creator, who,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When Thou didst mould the world, didst drain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The waters from the mass, that so</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Earth might immovable remain;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That its dull clods it might transmute</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To golden flowers in vale or wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To juice of thirst allaying fruit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And grateful herbage spread for food;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wash Thou our smarting wounds and hot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the cool freshness of Thy grace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till tears start forth the past to blot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And cleanse and calm Thy holy place;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Till we obey Thy full behest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shun the world’s tainted touch and breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Joy in what highest is and best.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gain a spell to baffle death.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Grant it, O Father, Only Son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Holy Spirit, God of grace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whom all glory, Three in One,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be given in every time and place.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="vespers-wednesday" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXLVI</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Vespers⁠—Wednesday</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">
					<i xml:lang="la">Cœli Deus sanctissime.</i>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>O <strong>Lord</strong>, who, thron’d in the holy height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through plains of ether didst diffuse</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The dazzling beams of light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">In soft transparent hues;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Who didst, on the fourth day, in heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Light the fierce cresset of the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And the meek moon at even,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">And stars that wildly run;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That they might mark and arbitrate</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twixt alternating night and day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And tend the train sedate</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Of months upon their way;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Clear, Lord, the brooding night within,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And clean these hearts for Thy abode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Unlock the spell of sin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Crumble its giant load.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Grant it, O Father, Only Son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Holy Spirit, God of grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To whom all praise be done</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">In every time and place.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="vespers-thursday" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXLVII</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Vespers⁠—Thursday</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">
					<i xml:lang="la">Magnæ Deus potentiæ.</i>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>O <strong>God</strong>, who hast given</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">the sea and the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fish and to bird</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">for a dwelling to keep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both sons of the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">one low and one high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ambitious of heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">yet sunk in the deep;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Save, Lord, Thy servants,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">whom Thou hast new made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a laver of blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">lest they trespass and die;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest pride should elate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">or the flesh should degrade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they stumble on earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">or be dizzied on high.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To the Father and Son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Spirit be done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now and always,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glory and praise.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="vespers-friday" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXLVIII</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Vespers⁠—Friday</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">
					<i xml:lang="la">Hominis superne Conditor.</i>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span class="i3"><strong>Whom</strong> all obey⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maker of man! who from Thy height</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Badest the dull earth bring to light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All creeping things, and the fierce might</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Of beasts of prey;⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i3">And the huge make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wild or gentler animal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Springing from nothing at Thy call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To serve in their due time, and all</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">For sinners’ sake;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i3">Shield us from ill!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come it by passion’s sudden stress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lurk in our mind’s habitual dress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or through our actions seek to press</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Upon our will.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i3">Vouchsafe the prize</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sacred joy’s perpetual mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And service-seeking gratitude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And love to quell each strife or feud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">If it arise.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i3">Grant it, O Lord!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whom, the Father, Only Son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Holy Spirit, Three in One,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In heaven and earth all praise be done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">With one accord.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="vespers-saturday" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXLIX</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Vespers⁠—Saturday</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">
					<i xml:lang="la">Jam sol recedit igneus.</i>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>The</strong> red sun is gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Thou Light of the heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blessed Three, Holy One,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Thy servants a sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Everlasting impart.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There were Lauds in the morn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Here are Vespers at even;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh, may we adorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy temple new born</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">With our voices in Heaven.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To the Father be praise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And praise to the Son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Spirit always,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the infinite days</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of eternity run.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="compline" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CL</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Compline</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">
					<i xml:lang="la">Te lucis ante terminum.</i>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Now</strong> that the day-light dies away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By all Thy grace and love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thee, Maker of the world, we pray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To watch our bed above.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Let dreams depart and phantoms fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The offspring of the night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Keep us, like shrines, beneath Thine eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pure in our foe’s despite.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This grace on Thy redeem’d confer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Father, Co-equal Son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Holy Ghost, the Comforter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Eternal Three in One.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="advent-vespers" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLI</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Advent⁠—Vespers</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">
					<i xml:lang="la">Creator alme siderum.</i>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Creator</strong> of the starry pole,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Saviour of all who live,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And light of every faithful soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Jesu, these prayers receive.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Who sooner than our foe malign</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should triumph, from above</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Didst come, to be the medicine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of a sick world, in love;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And the deep wounds to cleanse and cure</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of a whole race, didst go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pure Victim, from a Virgin pure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bitter Cross unto.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Who hast a Name, and hast a Power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The height and depth to sway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Angels bow, and devils cower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In transport or dismay;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou too shalt be our Judge at length;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lord, in Thy grace bestow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy weapons of celestial strength,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And snatch us from the foe.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Honour and glory, power and praise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To Father, and to Son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Holy Ghost, be paid always,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Eternal Three in One.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="advent-matins" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLII</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Advent⁠—Matins</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">
					<i xml:lang="la">Verbum supernum prodiens.</i>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Supernal</strong> Word, proceeding from</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Eternal Father’s breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the end of ages come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To aid a world distrest;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Enlighten, Lord, and set on fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our spirits with Thy love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, dead to earth, they may aspire</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And live to joys above.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That, when the judgment-seat on high</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall fix the sinner’s doom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to the just a glad voice cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Come to your destined home;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Safe from the black and yawning lake</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of restless, endless pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We may the face of God partake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The bliss of heaven attain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To God the Father, God the Son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Holy Ghost, to Thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As heretofore, when time is done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unending glory be.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="advent-lauds" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLIII</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Advent⁠—Lauds</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">
					<i xml:lang="la">En clara vox redarguit.</i>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Hark</strong>, a joyful voice is thrilling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And each dim and winding way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the ancient Temple filling;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dreams, depart! for it is day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Christ is coming!⁠—from thy bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Earth-bound soul, awake and spring⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the sun new-risen to shed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Health on human suffering.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lo! to grant a pardon free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Comes a willing Lamb from Heaven;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sad and tearful, hasten we,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">One and all, to be forgiven.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Once again He comes in light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Girding earth with fear and woe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lord! be Thou our loving Might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From our guilt and ghostly foe.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To the Father, and the Son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the Spirit, who in Heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever witness, Three and One,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Praise on earth be ever given.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-transfiguration-matins" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLIV</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Transfiguration⁠—Matins</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">
					<i xml:lang="la">Quicunque Christum quæritis.</i>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>O <strong>ye</strong> who seek the Lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lift up your eyes on high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For there He doth the Sign accord</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of His bright majesty.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>We see a dazzling sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That shall outlive all time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Older than depth or starry height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Limitless and sublime.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Tis He for Israel’s fold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And heathen tribes decreed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The King to Abraham pledged of old</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And his unfailing seed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Prophets foretold His birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And witness’d when He came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Father speaks to all the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To hear, and own His name.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To Jesus, who displays</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To babes His beaming face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be, with the Father, endless praise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with the Spirit of grace. <em>Amen.</em></span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-transfiguration-lauds" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLV</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Transfiguration⁠—Lauds</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">
					<i xml:lang="la">Lux alma Jesu.</i>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Light</strong> of the anxious heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Jesus, Thou dost appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bid the gloom of guilt depart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And shed Thy sweetness here.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Joyous is he, with whom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">God’s Word, Thou dost abide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweet Light of our eternal home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To fleshly sense denied.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Brightness of God above!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unfathomable grace!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy Presence be a fount of love</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Within Thy chosen place.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To Thee, whom children see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Father ever blest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Holy Spirit, One and Three,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be endless praise addrest. <em>Amen.</em></span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="for-a-martyr" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLVI</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">For a Martyr</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">
					<i xml:lang="la">Deus tuorum militum.</i>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>O <strong>God</strong>, of Thy soldiers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">the Portion and Crown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spare sinners who hymn</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">the praise of the Blest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth’s bitter joys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">its lures and its frown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He scann’d them and scorn’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">and so is at rest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thy Martyr he ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">all valiantly o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A highway of blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">for the prize Thou hast given.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We kneel at Thy feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">and meekly implore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That our pardon may wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i6">on his triumph in heaven.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Honour and praise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the Father and Son</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the Spirit be done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now and always. <em>Amen.</em></span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="for-a-confessor-bishop" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLVII</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">For a Confessor Bishop</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">
					<i xml:lang="la">Christe Pastorum.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-14" id="noteref-14" epub:type="noteref">14</a></i>
				</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>O <strong>Thou</strong>, of shepherds Prince and Head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now on a Bishop’s festal-day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy flock to many a shrine have sped</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Their vows to pay.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He to the high and dreadful throne</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Urged by no false inspirings, prest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor on hot daring of his own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">But Thy behest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And so, that soldier good and tried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From the full horn of heavenly grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy Spirit did anoint, to guide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Thy ransom’d race.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And he becomes a father true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spending and spent, when troubles fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A pattern and a servant too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">All things to all.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>His pleading sets the sinner free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He soothes the sick, he lifts the low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Powerful in word, deep teacher, he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">To quell the foe.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Grant us, O Christ, his prayers above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And grace below to sing Thy praise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Father’s power, the Spirit’s love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">Now and always.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Littlemore</em>. <time datetime="1842-02-07"><em>February</em> 7, 1842.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="ethelwald" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLVIII</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Ethelwald</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">From <abbr>St.</abbr> Bede’s Metrical History of <abbr>St.</abbr> Cuthbert.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span class="i1"><strong>Between</strong> two comrades dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Zealous and true as they,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou, prudent Ethelwald, didst bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In that high home the sway.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">A man, who ne’er, ’tis said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Would of his graces tell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or with what arms he triumphèd</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Over the Dragon fell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">So down to us hath come</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A memorable word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which in unguarded season from</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">His blessed lips was heard.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">It chanced, that, as the Saint</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Drank in with faithful ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Angel tones the whispers faint,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Thus spoke a brother dear:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Oh, why so many a pause,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Thwarting thy words’ full stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till her dark line Oblivion draws</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Across the broken theme?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">He answered: “Till thou seal</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To sounds of earth thine ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweet friend, be sure thou ne’er shalt feel</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Angelic voices near.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">But then the hermit blest</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A sudden change came o’er;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He shudders, sobs, and smites his breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Is mute, then speaks once more:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Oh, by the Name Most High,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">What I have now let fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hush, till I lay me down to die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And go the way of all!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Thus did a Saint in fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">His gifts celestial hide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus did an Angel standing near</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Proclaim them far and wide.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>Littlemore</em>. <time datetime="1844">1844.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="candlemas" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLIX</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Candlemas</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">(A Song.)</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>The</strong> Angel-lights of Christmas morn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which shot across the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Away they pass at Candlemas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They sparkle and they die.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Comfort of earth is brief at best,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Although it be divine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like funeral lights for Christmas gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Old Simeon’s tapers shine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then for eight long weeks and more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We wait in twilight grey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the high candle sheds a beam</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On Holy Saturday.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>We wait along the penance-tide</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of solemn fast and prayer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While song is hush’d, and lights grow dim</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the sin-laden air.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And while the sword in Mary’s soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is driven home, we hide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In our own hearts, and count the wounds</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of passion and of pride.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And still, though Candlemas be spent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Alleluias o’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mary is music in our need,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Jesus light in store.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>The Oratory</em>. <time datetime="1849">1849.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-pilgrim-queen" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLX</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Pilgrim Queen</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">(A Song.)</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>There</strong> sat a Lady</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">all on the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rays of the morning</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">circled her round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save thee, and hail to thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Gracious and Fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the chill twilight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">what wouldst thou there?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Here I sit desolate,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">sweetly said she,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Though I’m a queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">and my name is Marie:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Robbers have rifled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">my garden and store,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Foes they have stolen</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">my heir from my bower.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“They said they could keep Him</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">far better than I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a palace all His,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">planted deep and raised high.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas a palace of ice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">hard and cold as were they,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when summer came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">it all melted away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Next would they barter Him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Him the Supreme,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the spice of the desert,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">and gold of the stream;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And me they bid wander</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">in weeds and alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this green merry land</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">which once was my own.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I look’d on that Lady,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">and out from her eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came the deep glowing blue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">of Italy’s skies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she raised up her head</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">and she smiled, as a Queen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the day of her crowning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">so bland and serene.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“A moment,” she said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">“and the dead shall revive;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The giants are failing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">the Saints are alive;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am coming to rescue</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">my home and my reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Peter and Philip</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">are close in my train.”</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>The Oratory</em>. <time datetime="1849">1849.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-month-of-mary" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXI</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Month of Mary</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">(A Song.)</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Green</strong> are the leaves, and sweet the flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And rich the hues of May;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We see them in the gardens round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And market-paniers gay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And e’en among our streets, and lanes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And alleys, we descry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By fitful gleams, the fair sunshine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The blue transparent sky.</span>
			</p>
			<div epub:type="z3998:song">
				<header>
					<p>Chorus.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>O Mother maid, be thou our aid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now in the opening year;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lest sights of earth to sin give birth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bring the tempter near.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p>
				<span>Green is the grass, but wait awhile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Twill grow, and then will wither;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flowrets, brightly as they smile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall perish altogether:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The merry sun, you sure would say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It ne’er could set in gloom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But earth’s best joys have all an end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sin, a heavy doom.</span>
			</p>
			<div epub:type="z3998:song">
				<header>
					<p>Chorus.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But Mother maid, thou dost not fade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With stars above thy brow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the pale moon beneath thy feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ever throned art thou.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p>
				<span>The green green grass, the glittering grove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The heaven’s majestic dome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They image forth a tenderer bower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A more refulgent home;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They tell us of that Paradise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of everlasting rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that high Tree, all flowers and fruit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sweetest, yet the best.</span>
			</p>
			<div epub:type="z3998:song">
				<header>
					<p>Chorus.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>O Mary, pure and beautiful,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou art the Queen of May;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our garlands wear about thy hair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And they will ne’er decay.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<footer>
				<p><em>The Oratory</em>. <time datetime="1850">1850.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-queen-of-seasons" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXII</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Queen of Seasons</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">(A Song for an inclement May.)</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>All</strong> is divine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">which the Highest has made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the days that He wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">till the day when He stay’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above and below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">within and around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the centre of space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">to its uttermost bound.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In beauty surpassing</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">the Universe smiled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the morn of its birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">like an innocent child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or like the rich bloom</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">of some delicate flower;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Father rejoiced</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">in the work of His power.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet worlds brighter still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">and a brighter than those,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a brighter again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">He had made, had He chose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And you never could name</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">that conceivable best,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To exhaust the resources</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">the Maker possess’d.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But I know of one work</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">of his Infinite Hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which special and singular</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">ever must stand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So perfect, so pure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">and of gifts such a store,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That even Omnipotence</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">ne’er shall do more.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The freshness of May,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">and the sweetness of June,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the fire of July</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">in its passionate noon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Munificent August,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">September serene,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are together no match</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">for my glorious Queen.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O Mary, all months</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">and all days are thine own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thee lasts their joyousness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">when they are gone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we give to thee May,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">not because it is best,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But because it comes first,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">and is pledge of the rest.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>The Oratory</em>. <time datetime="1850">1850.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="valentine-to-a-little-girl" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXIII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Valentine to a Little Girl</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Little</strong> maiden, dost thou pine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a faithful Valentine?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Art thou scanning timidly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Every face that meets thine eye?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Art thou fancying there may be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fairer face than thou dost see?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Little maiden, scholar mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wouldst thou have a Valentine?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Go and ask, my little child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ask the Mother undefiled:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ask, for she will draw thee near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And will whisper in thine ear:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Valentine! the name is good;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For it comes of lineage high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And a famous family:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And it tells of gentle blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Noble blood⁠—and nobler still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For its owner freely pour’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Every drop there was to spill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the quarrel of his Lord.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Valentine! I know the name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many martyrs bear the same;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they stand in glittering ring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round their warrior God and King⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who before and for them bled⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With their robes of ruby red,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their swords of cherub flame.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yes! there is a plenty there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knights without reproach or fear⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such <abbr>St.</abbr> Denys, such <abbr>St.</abbr> George,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Martin, Maurice, Theodore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And a hundred thousand more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Guerdon gain’d and warfare o’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By that sea without a surge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And beneath the eternal sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the beatific Sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In Jerusalem above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Valentine is every one;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Choose from out that company</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom to serve, and whom to love.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>The Oratory</em>. <time datetime="1850">1850.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="st-philip-neri-in-his-mission" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXIV</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>St.</abbr> Philip Neri in His Mission</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">(A Song.)</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>In</strong> the far North our lot is cast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where faithful hearts are few;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still are we Philip’s children dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Peter’s soldiers true.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Founder and Sire! to mighty Rome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beneath <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter’s shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Early thy vow of loyal love</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And ministry was paid.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The solemn porch, and portal high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Peter was thy home;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The world’s Apostle he, and thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Apostle of his Rome.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And first in the old catacombs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In galleries long and deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where martyr Popes had ruled the flock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And slept their glorious sleep,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There didst thou pass the nights in prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Until at length there came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down on thy breast, new lit for thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The Pentecostal flame;⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then, in that heart-consuming love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Didst walk the city wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lure the noble and the young</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From Babel’s pomp and pride;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And, gathering them within thy cell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unveil the lustre bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And beauty of thy inner soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And gain them by the sight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus to Rome, for Peter’s faith</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Far known, thou didst impart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy lessons of the hidden life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And discipline of heart.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And as the Apostle, on the hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Facing the Imperial Town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First gazed upon his fair domain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then on the cross lay down,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So thou, from out the streets of Rome</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Didst turn thy failing eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto that mount of martyrdom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Take leave of it, and die.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-15" id="noteref-15" epub:type="noteref">15</a></span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>The Oratory</em>. <time datetime="1850">1850.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="st-philip-in-himself" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXV</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>St.</abbr> Philip in Himself</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">(A Song.)</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>The</strong> holy Monks, conceal’d from men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In midnight choir, or studious cell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In sultry field, or wintry glen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The holy Monks, I love them well.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Friars too, the zealous band</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By Dominic or Francis led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They gather, and they take their stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where foes are fierce, or friends have fled.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then the unwearied Company,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which bears the Name of Sacred might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Knights of Jesus, they defy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The fiend⁠—full eager for the fight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet there is one I more affect</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Than Jesuit, Hermit, Monk, or Friar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis an old man of sweet aspèct,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I love him more, I more admire.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I know him by his head of snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His ready smile, his keen full eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His words which kindle as they flow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save he be rapt in ecstasy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He lifts his hands, there issues forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A fragrance virginal and rare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now he ventures to our North,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where hearts are frozen as the air.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He comes, by grace of his address,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By the sweet music of his face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his low tones of tenderness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To melt a noble, stubborn race.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O sainted Philip, Father dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Look on thy little ones, that we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy loveliness may copy here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in the eternal Kingdom see.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>The Oratory</em>. <time datetime="1850">1850.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="st-philip-in-his-god" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXVI</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>St.</abbr> Philip in His God</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Philip</strong>, on thee the glowing ray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of heaven came down upon thy prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To melt thy heart, and burn away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">All that of earthly dross was there.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thy soul became as purest glass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through which the Brightness Incarnate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In undimm’d majesty might pass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Transparent and illuminate.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And so, on Philip when we gaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We see the image of his Lord;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Saint dissolves amid the blaze</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which circles round the Living Word.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Meek, the Wise, none else is here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dispensing light to men below;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His awful accents fill the ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now keen as fire, now soft as snow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As snow, those inward pleadings fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As soft, as bright, as pure, as cool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With gentle weight and gradual,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sink into the feverish soul.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Sinless One, He comes to seek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The dreary heart, the spirit lone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tender of natures proud or weak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not less than if they were His own.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He takes and scans the sinner o’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Handling His scholars one by one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weighing what they can bear, before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He gives the penance to be done.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Jesu, to Philip’s sons reveal</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That gentlest wisdom from above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To spread compassion o’er their zeal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And mingle patience with their love.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>The Oratory</em>. <time datetime="1850">1850.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="guardian-angel" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXVII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Guardian Angel</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>My</strong> oldest friend, mine from the hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When first I drew my breath;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My faithful friend, that shall be mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unfailing, till my death;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou hast been ever at my side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My Maker to thy trust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Consign’d my soul, what time He framed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The infant child of dust.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>No beating heart in holy prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No faith, inform’d aright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave me to Joseph’s tutelage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or Michael’s conquering might.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nor patron Saint, nor Mary’s love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The dearest and the best,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has known my being, as thou hast known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And blest, as thou hast blest,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou wast my sponsor at the font;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And thou, each budding year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Didst whisper elements of truth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into my childish ear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And when, ere boyhood yet was gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My rebel spirit fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah! thou didst see, and shudder too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet bear each deed of Hell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then in turn, when judgments came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And scared me back again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy quick soft breath was near to soothe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And hallow every pain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Oh! who of all thy toils and cares</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Can tell the tale complete,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To place me under Mary’s smile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And Peter’s royal feet!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thou wilt hang about my bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When life is ebbing low;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of doubt, impatience, and of gloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The jealous sleepless foe.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Mine, when I stand before the Judge;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And mine, if spared to stay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the golden furnace, till</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My sin is burn’d away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And mine, O Brother of my soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When my release shall come;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy gentle arms shall lift me then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy wings shall waft me home.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>The Oratory</em>. <time datetime="1853">1853.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-golden-prison" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXVIII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Golden Prison</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Weep</strong> not for me, when I am gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor spend thy faithful breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In grieving o’er the spot or hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of all-enshrouding death;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nor waste in idle praise thy love</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On deeds of head or hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which live within the living Book,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or else are writ in sand;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But let it be thy best of prayers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That I may find the grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To reach the holy house of toll,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The frontier penance-place⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To reach that golden palace bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where souls elect abide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waiting their certain call to Heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With Angels at their side;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Where hate, nor pride, nor fear torments</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The transitory guest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in the willing agony</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He plunges, and is blest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And as the fainting patriarch gain’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His needful halt mid-way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then refresh’d pursued his path,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where up the mount it lay,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So pray, that, rescued from the storm</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of heaven’s eternal ire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I may lie down, then rise again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Safe, and yet saved by fire.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>The Oratory</em>. <time datetime="1853">1853.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="heathen-greece" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXIX</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Heathen Greece</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">(A Song.)</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Where</strong> are the Islands of the Blest?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">They stud the Ægean Sea;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And where the deep Elysian rest?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It haunts the vale where Peneus strong</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pours his incessant stream along,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While craggy ridge and mountain bare</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Cut keenly through the liquid air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And in their own pure tints array’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scorn earth’s green robes which change and fade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And stand in beauty undecay’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Guards of the bold and free.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For what is Afric, but the home</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of burning Phlegethon?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What the low beach and silent gloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And chilling mists of that dull river,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Along whose bank the thin ghosts shiver⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The thin wan ghosts that once were men⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But Tauris, isle of moor and fen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or, dimly traced by seamen’s ken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The pale-cliff’d Albion.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>The Oratory</em>. <time datetime="1856">1856.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="a-martyr-convert" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXX</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">A Martyr Convert</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">(A Hymn.)</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>The</strong> number of Thine own complete,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sum up and make an end;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sift clean the chaff, and house the wheat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And then, O Lord, descend.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Descend, and solve by that descent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This mystery of life;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where good and ill, together blent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wage an undying strife.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For rivers twain are gushing still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And pour a mingled flood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good in the very depths of ill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ill in the heart of good.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The last are first, the first are last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As angel eyes behold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These from the sheep-cote sternly cast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Those welcomed to the fold.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>No Christian home, no pastor’s eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No preacher’s vocal zeal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moved Thy dear Martyr to defy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The prison and the wheel.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Forth from the heathen ranks she stept,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The forfeit crown to claim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Christian souls who had not kept</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their birthright and their name.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Grace form’d her out of sinful dust;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She knelt a soul defiled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She rose in all the faith, and trust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sweetness of a child.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And in the freshness of that love</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She preach’d, by word and deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mysteries of the world above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her new-found, glorious creed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And running, in a little hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of life the course complete,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She reach’d the Throne of endless power;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sits at Jesu’s feet.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Her spirit there, her body here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Make one the earth and sky;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We use her name, we touch her bier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We know her God is nigh.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Praise to the Father, as is meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Praise to the Only Son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Praise to the Holy Paraclete</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While endless ages run.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>The Oratory</em>. <time datetime="1856">1856.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="st-philip-in-his-school" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXXI</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>St.</abbr> Philip in His School</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">(A Song.)</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>This</strong> is the Saint of gentleness and kindness,</span>
				<span class="i1">Cheerful in penance, and in precept winning;</span>
				<span>Patiently healing of their pride and blindness,</span>
				<span class="i12">Souls that are sinning.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This is the Saint, who, when the world allures us,</span>
				<span class="i1">Cries her false wares, and opes her magic coffers,</span>
				<span>Points to a better city, and secures us</span>
				<span class="i12">With richer offers.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Love is his bond, he knows no other fetter,</span>
				<span class="i1">Asks not our all, but takes whate’er we spare him,</span>
				<span>Willing to draw us on from good to better,</span>
				<span class="i12">As we can bear him.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When he comes near to teach us and to bless us,</span>
				<span class="i1">Prayer is so sweet, that hours are but a minute;</span>
				<span>Mirth is so pure, though freely it possess us,</span>
				<span class="i12">Sin is not in it.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus he conducts by holy paths and pleasant,</span>
				<span class="i1">Innocent souls, and sinful souls forgiven,</span>
				<span>Towards the bright palace where our God is present,</span>
				<span class="i12">Throned in high heaven.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>The Oratory</em>. <time datetime="1857">1857.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="st-philip-in-his-disciples" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXXII</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>St.</abbr> Philip in His Disciples</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">(A Song.)</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>I <strong>ask</strong> not for fortune, for silken attire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For servants to throng me, and crowds to admire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I ask not for power, or for name or success,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These do not content me, these never can bless.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Let the world flaunt her glories! each glittering prize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though tempting to others, is nought in my eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A child of <abbr>St.</abbr> Philip, my master and guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I would live as he lived, and would die as he died.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Why should I be sadden’d, though friendless I be?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For who in his youth was so lonely as he?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If spited and mock’d, so was he, when he cried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his God on the cross to stand by his side.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If scanty my fare, yet how was he fed?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On olives and herbs and a small roll of bread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are my joints and bones sore with aches and with pains?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Philip scourged his young flesh with fine iron chains.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A closet his home, where he, year after year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bore heat or cold greater than heat or cold here;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A rope stretch’d across it, and o’er it he spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His small stock of clothes; and the floor was his bed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>One lodging besides; God’s temple he chose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he slept in its porch his few hours of repose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or studied by light which the altar-lamp gave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or knelt at the Martyr’s victorious grave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I’m ashamed of myself, of my tears and my tongue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So easily fretted, so often unstrung;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mad at trifles, to which a chance moment gives birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Complaining of heaven, and complaining of earth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So now, with his help, no cross will I fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But will linger resign’d through my pilgrimage here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A child of <abbr>St.</abbr> Philip, my master and guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will live as he lived, and will die as he died.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>The Oratory</em>. <time datetime="1857">1857.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="for-the-dead" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXXIII</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">For the Dead</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">(A Hymn.)</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Help</strong>, Lord, the souls which Thou hast made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The souls to Thee so dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In prison for the debt unpaid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of sins committed here.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Those holy souls, they suffer on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Resign’d in heart and will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until Thy high behest is done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And justice has its fill.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For daily falls, for pardon’d crime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">They joy to undergo</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shadow of Thy cross sublime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The remnant of Thy woe.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Help, Lord, the souls which Thou hast made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The souls to Thee so dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In prison for the debt unpaid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of sins committed here.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Oh, by their patience of delay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Their hope amid their pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their sacred zeal to burn away</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Disfigurement and stain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh, by their fire of love, not less</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In keenness than the flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh, by their very helplessness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Oh, by Thy own great Name,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Good Jesu, help! sweet Jesu, aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The souls to Thee most dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In prison for the debt unpaid</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of sins committed here.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>The Oratory</em>. <time datetime="1857">1857.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="to-edward-caswall" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXXIV</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">To Edward Caswall</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">(A gift for the new year in return for his volume of Poems.)</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Once</strong>, o’er a clear calm pool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fulness of an over-brimming spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I saw the hawthorn and the chestnut fling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their willing arms, of vernal blossoms full</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And light green leaves: the lilac too was there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prodigal laburnum, dropping gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the rich gorse along the turf crept near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close to the fountain’s margin, and made bold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To peep into that pool, so calm and clear:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if well pleased to see their image bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reflected back upon their innocent sight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each flower and blossom shy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lingering the live-long day in still delight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet without touch of pride, to view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, with a tender, holy sympathy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What was itself, yet was another too.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So on thy verse, my Brother and my Friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—The fresh upwelling of thy tranquil spirit⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I see a many angel forms attend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gracious souls elect,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thronging sacred shades, that shall inherit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One day the azure skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And peaceful saints, in whitest garments deck’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And happy infants of the second birth:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These, and all other plants of paradise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thoughts from above, and visions that are sure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And providences past, and memories dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In much content hang o’er that mirror pure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And recognize each other’s faces there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And see a heaven on earth.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>The Oratory</em>. <time datetime="1858-01-01"><em>January</em> 1, 1858.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="the-two-worlds" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXXV</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Two Worlds</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>Unveil</strong>, O Lord, and on us shine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In glory and in grace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This gaudy world grows pale before</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The beauty of Thy face.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Till Thou art seen, it seems to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A sort of fairy ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where suns unsetting light the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And flowers and fruits abound.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But when Thy keener, purer beam</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Is pour’d upon our sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It loses all its power to charm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And what was day is night.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Its noblest toils are then the scourge</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Which made Thy blood to flow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its joys are but the treacherous thorns</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Which circled round Thy brow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus, when we renounce for Thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Its restless aims and fears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tender memories of the past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The hopes of coming years,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Poor is our sacrifice, whose eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Are lighted from above;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We offer what we cannot keep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">What we have ceased to love.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>The Oratory</em>. <time datetime="1862">1862.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="st-michael" epub:type="z3998:song">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXXVI</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>St.</abbr> Michael</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">(A Hymn.)</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span class="i4"><strong>Thou</strong> champion high</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Of Heaven’s imperial Bride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">For ever waiting on her eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Before her onward path, and at her side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In war her guard secure, by night her ready guide!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i4">To thee was given,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">When those false angels rose</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Against the Majesty of Heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To hurl them down the steep, and on them close</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prison where they roam in hopeless unrepose.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i4">Thee, Michael, thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">When sight and breathing fail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The disembodied soul shall see;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The pardon’d soul with solemn joy shall hail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When holiest rites are spent, and tears no more avail.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i4">And thou, at last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">When Time itself must die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Shalt sound that dread and piercing blast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To wake the dead, and rend the vaulted sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And summon all to meet the Omniscient Judge on high.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>The Oratory</em>. <time datetime="1862">1862.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
		<article id="prologus-in-phormonionem" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXXVII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Prologus in Phormonionem</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span><strong>What</strong> Attic Terence wrote of old for Rome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We in our northern accents lisp to-night;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What heathen Terence spoke to heathen ears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We speak with Christian tongues to Christian men:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doing the while this service to the Bard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the rare beauty of his classic wit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We by our pruning make more beautiful.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O happy art, which Terence never knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they have learned, who aim in every thing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To choose the good, and pass the evil by!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These, as they pace the tangled path of life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cleanse from this earth its earthly dross away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And clothe it with a pure supernal light.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Neighbours and friends, what I have more to say⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is not much⁠—concerns our actors here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fresh tender souls, and palpitating hearts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Boys, who, tho’ boys, essay the parts of men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And are the first within this Catholic fold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To represent a classic comedy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be kind⁠—they strive with no inglorious aim;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where they do well, applaud; and, if in aught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They shall come short, be mild and merciful.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Prologue enough; let Davus enter now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lend his ear, while Geta tells his tale.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p><em>The Oratory</em>. <time datetime="1864">1864.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
