<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>CLXXVIII: The Dream of Gerontius</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="the-dream-of-gerontius" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXXVIII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Dream of Gerontius</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="the-dream-of-gerontius-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">§</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">1</span>
				</h3>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gerontius</b><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-17" id="noteref-17" epub:type="noteref">17</a>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span><strong>Jesu, Maria</strong>⁠—I am near to death,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-18" id="noteref-18" epub:type="noteref">18</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And Thou art calling me; I know it now⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not by the token of this faltering breath,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">This chill at heart, this dampness on my brow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(Jesu, have mercy! Mary, pray for me!)⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">’Tis this new feeling, never felt before,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(Be with me, Lord, in my extremity!)</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That I am going, that I am no more.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis this strange innermost abandonment,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">(Lover of souls! great God! I look to Thee,)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This emptying out of each constituent</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And natural force, by which I come to be.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pray for me, O my friends; a visitant</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Is knocking his dire summons at my door,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The like of whom, to scare me and to daunt,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Has never, never come to me before;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis death⁠—O loving friends, your prayers!⁠—’tis he!⁠ ⁠…</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As though my very being had given way,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">As though I was no more a substance now,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And could fall back on nought to be my stay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">(Help, loving Lord! Thou my sole Refuge, Thou,)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And turn no whither, but must needs decay</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And drop from out the universal frame</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into that shapeless, scopeless, blank abyss,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That utter nothingness, of which I came:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This is it that has come to pass in me;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O horror! this it is, my dearest, this;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So pray for me, my friends, who have not strength to pray.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Assistants</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span xml:lang="grc">Kyrie eleïson,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-19" id="noteref-19" epub:type="noteref">19</a> Christe eleïson, Kyrie eleïson.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Holy Mary, pray for him.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All holy Angels, pray for him.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Choirs of the righteous, pray for him.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Holy Abraham, pray for him.</span>
						<br/>
						<span><abbr>St.</abbr> John Baptist, <abbr>St.</abbr> Joseph, pray for him.</span>
						<br/>
						<span><abbr>St.</abbr> Peter, <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul, <abbr>St.</abbr> Andrew, <abbr>St.</abbr> John,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All Apostles, all Evangelists, pray for him.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All holy Disciples of the Lord, pray for him.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All holy Innocents, pray for him.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All holy Martyrs, all holy Confessors,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All holy Hermits, all holy Virgins,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All ye Saints of God, pray for him.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gerontius</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Rouse thee,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-20" id="noteref-20" epub:type="noteref">20</a> my fainting soul, and play the man;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And through such waning span</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of life and thought as still has to be trod,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Prepare to meet thy God.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And while the storm of that bewilderment</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Is for a season spent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, ere afresh the ruin on thee fall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Use well the interval.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Assistants</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Be merciful,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-21" id="noteref-21" epub:type="noteref">21</a> be gracious; spare him, Lord.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be merciful, be gracious; Lord, deliver him.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">From the sins that are past;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i3">From Thy frown and Thine ire;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">From the perils of dying;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">From any complying</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">With sin, or denying</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">His God, or relying</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">On self, at the last;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i3">From the nethermost fire</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">From all that is evil;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">From power of the devil;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Thy servant deliver,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">For once and for ever.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i2">By Thy birth, and by Thy Cross,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Rescue him from endless loss;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">By Thy death and burial,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Save him from a final fall;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">By Thy rising from the tomb,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i3">By Thy mounting up above,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i3">By the Spirit’s gracious love,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Save him in the day of doom.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gerontius</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span xml:lang="la">Sanctus fortis, Sanctus Deus,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-22" id="noteref-22" epub:type="noteref">22</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2" xml:lang="la">De profundis oro te,</span>
						<br/>
						<span xml:lang="la">Miserere, Judex meus,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2" xml:lang="la">Parce mihi, Domine.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-23" id="noteref-23" epub:type="noteref">23</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Firmly I believe and truly</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">God is Three, and God is One;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And I next acknowledge duly</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Manhood taken by the Son.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And I trust and hope most fully</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">In that Manhood crucified;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And each thought and deed unruly</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Do to death, as He has died.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Simply to His grace and wholly</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Light and life and strength belong,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And I love, supremely, solely,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Him the holy, Him the strong.</span>
						<br/>
						<span xml:lang="la">Sanctus fortis, Sanctus Deus,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2" xml:lang="la">De profundis oro te,</span>
						<br/>
						<span xml:lang="la">Miserere, Judex meus,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2" xml:lang="la">Parce mihi, Domine.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And I hold in veneration,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">For the love of Him alone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Holy Church, as His creation,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And her teachings, as His own.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And I take with joy whatever</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Now besets me, pain or fear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And with a strong will I sever</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">All the ties which bind me here.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Adoration aye be given</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">With and through the angelic host,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To the God of earth and heaven,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.</span>
						<br/>
						<span xml:lang="la">Sanctus fortis, Sanctus Deus,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2" xml:lang="la">De profundis oro te,</span>
						<br/>
						<span xml:lang="la">Miserere, Judex meus,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2" xml:lang="la">Mortis in discrimine.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-24" id="noteref-24" epub:type="noteref">24</a></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>I can no more; for now it comes again,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That sense of ruin, which is worse than pain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That masterful negation and collapse</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of all that makes me man; as though I bent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Over the dizzy brink</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of some sheer infinite descent;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or worse, as though</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Down, down for ever I was falling through</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The solid framework of created things,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And needs must sink and sink</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into the vast abyss. And, crueller still,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A fierce and restless fright begins to fill</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The mansion of my soul. And, worse and worse,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some bodily form of ill</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Floats on the wind, with many a loathsome curse</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tainting the hallowed air, and laughs, and flaps</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Its hideous wings,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And makes me wild with horror and dismay.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O Jesu, help! pray for me, Mary, pray!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some angel, Jesu! such as came to Thee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In Thine own agony.⁠ ⁠…</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mary, pray for me. Joseph, pray for me.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i3">Mary, pray for me.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Assistants</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Rescue him, O Lord,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-25" id="noteref-25" epub:type="noteref">25</a> in this his evil hour,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As of old so many by Thy gracious power:⁠—(Amen.)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Enoch and Elias from the common doom; (Amen.)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Noe from the waters in a saving home; (Amen.)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Abraham from th’ abounding guilt of Heathenesse; (Amen.)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Job from all his multiform and fell distress; (Amen.)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Isaac, when his father’s knife was raised to slay; (Amen.)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lot from burning Sodom on its judgment-day; (Amen.)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Moses from the land of bondage and despair; (Amen.)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Daniel from the hungry lions in their lair; (Amen.)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And the Children Three amid the furnace-flame; (Amen.)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Chaste Susanna from the slander and the shame; (Amen.)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>David from Golia and the wrath of Saul; (Amen.)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And the two Apostles from their prison-thrall; (Amen.)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thecla from her torments; (Amen.)</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i12">—so, to show Thy power,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rescue this Thy servant in his evil hour.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gerontius</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span><span xml:lang="la">Novissima hora est</span>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-26" id="noteref-26" epub:type="noteref">26</a> and I fain would sleep,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The pain has wearied me.⁠ ⁠… Into Thy hands,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O Lord, into Thy hands.⁠ ⁠…</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">The Priest</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span xml:lang="la">Proficiscere, anima Christiana, de hoc mundo!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-27" id="noteref-27" epub:type="noteref">27</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Go forth upon thy journey, Christian soul!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Go from this world! Go, in the name of God,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The omnipotent Father, who created thee!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Go, in the name of Jesus Christ, our Lord,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Son of the living God, who bled for thee!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Go, in the Name of the Holy Spirit, who</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hath been poured out on thee! Go, in the name</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Angels and Archangels; in the name</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Thrones and Dominations; in the name</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Princedoms and of Powers; and in the name</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Cherubim and Seraphim, go forth!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Go, in the name of Patriarchs and Prophets;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And of Apostles and Evangelists,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Martyrs and Confessors; in the name</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of holy Monks and Hermits; in the name</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of holy Virgins; and all Saints of God,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both men and women, go! Go on thy course;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And may thy place to-day be found in peace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And may thy dwelling be the Holy Mount</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Sion:⁠—in the Name of Christ, our Lord.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</section>
			<section id="the-dream-of-gerontius-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">§</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">2</span>
				</h3>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Soul of Gerontius</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I went to sleep;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-28" id="noteref-28" epub:type="noteref">28</a> and now I am refreshed.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A strange refreshment: for I feel in me</span>
						<br/>
						<span>An inexpressive lightness, and a sense</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of freedom, as I were at length myself,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And ne’er had been before. How still it is!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I hear no more the busy beat of time,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No, nor my fluttering breath, nor struggling pulse;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor does one moment differ from the next.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I had a dream; yes:⁠—some one softly said</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“He’s gone”; and then a sigh went round the room.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And then I surely heard a priestly voice</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cry “Subvenite”; and they knelt in prayer.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I seem to hear him still; but thin and low,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And fainter and more faint the accents come,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As at an ever-widening interval.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ah! whence is this? What is this severance?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This silence pours a solitariness</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into the very essence of my soul;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And the deep rest, so soothing and so sweet,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hath something too of sternness and of pain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For it drives back my thoughts upon their spring</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By a strange introversion, and perforce</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I now begin to feed upon myself,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Because I have nought else to feed upon.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Am I alive or dead? I am not dead,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But in the body still; for I possess</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A sort of confidence which clings to me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That each particular organ holds its place</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As heretofore, combining with the rest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into one symmetry, that wraps me round,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And makes me man; and surely I could move,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Did I but will it, every part of me.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And yet I cannot to my sense bring home,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By very trial, that I have the power.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis strange; I cannot stir a hand or foot,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I cannot make my fingers or my lips</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By mutual pressure witness each to each,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor by the eyelid’s instantaneous stroke</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Assure myself I have a body still.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor do I know my very attitude,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor if I stand, or lie, or sit, or kneel.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>So much I know, not knowing how I know,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That the vast universe, where I have dwelt,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is quitting me, or I am quitting it.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or I or it is rushing on the wings</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of light or lightning on an onward course,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And we e’en now are million miles apart.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet⁠ ⁠… is this peremptory severance</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wrought out in lengthening measurements of space,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which grow and multiply by speed and time?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or am I traversing infinity</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By endless subchapter, hurrying back</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From finite towards infinitesimal,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thus dying out of the expansive world?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Another marvel:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-29" id="noteref-29" epub:type="noteref">29</a> someone has me fast</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Within his ample palm; ’tis not a grasp</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such as they use on earth, but all around</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Over the surface of my subtle being,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As though I were a sphere, and capable</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To be accosted thus, a uniform</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And gentle pressure tells me I am not</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Self-moving, but borne forward on my way.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And hark! I hear a singing; yet in sooth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I cannot of that music rightly say</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whether I hear or touch or taste the tones.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Oh what a heart-subduing melody!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>My work is done,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-30" id="noteref-30" epub:type="noteref">30</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">My task is o’er,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And so I come,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Taking it home,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For the crown is won,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Alleluia.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">For evermore.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My Father gave</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In charge to me</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">This child of earth</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">E’en from its birth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To serve and save,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Alleluia,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And saved is he.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This child of clay</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To me was given,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">To rear and train</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">By sorrow and pain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In the narrow way,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Alleluia,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">From earth to heaven.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Soul</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>It is a member of that family</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of wondrous beings, who, ere the worlds were made,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Millions of ages back, have stood around</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The throne of God:⁠—he never has known sin;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But through those cycles all but infinite,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Has had a strong and pure celestial life,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And born to gaze on th’ unveiled face of God</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And drank from the eternal Fount of truth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And served Him with a keen ecstatic love.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hark! he begins again.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>O Lord, how wonderful in depth and height,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">But most in man, how wonderful Thou art!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With what a love, what soft persuasive might</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Victorious o’er the stubborn fleshly heart</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Thy tale complete of saints Thou dost provide</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To fill the thrones which angels lost through pride!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>He lay a grovelling babe upon the ground,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Polluted in the blood of his first sire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With his whole essence shattered and unsound,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And, coiled around his heart, a demon dire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Which was not of his nature, but had skill</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To bind and form his opening mind to ill.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Then was I sent from heaven to set right</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">The balance in his soul of truth and sin,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And I have waged a long relentless fight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Resolved that death-environed spirit to win,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Which from its fallen state, when all was lost,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Had been repurchased at so dread a cost.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Oh what a shifting parti-coloured scene</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Of hope and fear, of triumph and dismay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of recklessness and penitence, has been</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">The history of that dreary, lifelong fray!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And oh the grace to nerve him and to lead,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">How patient, prompt, and lavish at his need!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>O man, strange composite of heaven and earth!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-31" id="noteref-31" epub:type="noteref">31</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Majesty dwarfed to baseness! fragrant flower</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Running to poisonous seed! and seeming worth</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Cloking corruption! weakness mastering power!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Who never art so near to crime and shame,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">As when thou hast achieved some deed of name;⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>How should ethereal natures comprehend</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">A thing made up of spirit and of clay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Were we not tasked to nurse it and to tend,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Linked one to one throughout its mortal day?</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">More than the Seraph in his height of place,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The Angel-guardian knows and loves the ransomed race.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Soul</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Now know I surely that I am at length</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Out of the body: had I part with earth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I never could have drunk those accents in,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And not have worshipped as a god the voice</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That was so musical; but now I am</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So whole of heart, so calm, so self-possessed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With such a full content, and with a sense</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So apprehensive and discriminant,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As no temptation can intoxicate.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor have I even terror at the thought</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That I am clasped by such a saintliness.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>All praise to Him, at whose sublime decree</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">The last are first, the first become the last;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By whom the suppliant prisoner is set free,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">By whom proud first-borns from their thrones are cast,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Who raises Mary to be Queen of heaven,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">While Lucifer is left, condemned and unforgiven.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</section>
			<section id="the-dream-of-gerontius-3" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">§</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">3</span>
				</h3>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Soul</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I will address him. Mighty one, my Lord,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My Guardian Spirit, all hail!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i14">All hail, my child!</span>
						<span>My child and brother, hail! what wouldest thou?</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Soul</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I would have nothing but to speak with thee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For speaking’s sake. I wish to hold with thee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Conscious communion; though I fain would know</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A maze of things, were it but meet to ask,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And not a curiousness.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i12">You cannot now</span>
						<span>Cherish a wish which ought not to be wished.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Soul</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Then I will speak. I ever had believed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That on the moment when the struggling soul</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Quitted its mortal case, forthwith it fell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Under the awful Presence of its God,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There to be judged and sent to its own place.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What lets me now from going to my Lord?</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Thou art not let; but with extremest speed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Art hurrying to the Just and Holy Judge:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For scarcely art thou disembodied yet.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Divide a moment, as men measure time,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into its million-million-millionth part,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet even less than that the interval</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Since thou didst leave the body; and the priest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cried “<span xml:lang="la">Subvenite</span>,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-32" id="noteref-32" epub:type="noteref">32</a> and they fell to prayer;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nay, scarcely yet have they begun to pray.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>For spirits and men by different standards mete</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The less and greater in the flow of time.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By sun and moon, primeval ordinances⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By stars which rise and set harmoniously⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By the recurring seasons, and the swing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This way and that, of the suspended rod</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Precise and punctual, men divide the hours,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Equal, continuous, for their common use.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not so with us in the immaterial world;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But intervals in their succession</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are measured by the living thought alone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And grow or wane with its intensity.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And time is not a common property;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But what is long is short, and swift is slow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And near is distant, as received and grasped</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By this mind and by that, and every one</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is standard of his own chronology.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And memory lacks its natural resting-points</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of years, and centuries, and periods.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It is thy very energy of thought</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which keeps thee from thy God.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Soul</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i16">Dear Angel, say,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Why have I now no fear at meeting Him?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Along my earthly life, the thought of death</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And judgment was to me most terrible.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I had it aye before me, and I saw</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Judge severe e’en in the crucifix.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now that the hour is come, my fear is fled;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And at this balance of my destiny,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now close upon me, I can forward look</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With a serenest joy.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i10">It is because</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then thou didst fear, that now thou dost not fear.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou hast forestalled the agony, and so</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For thee the bitterness of death is past.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Also, because already in thy soul</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The judgment is begun. That day of doom,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>One and the same for the collected world⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That solemn consummation for all flesh,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is, in the case of each, anticipate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon his death; and, as the last great day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In the particular judgment is rehearsed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So now too, ere thou comest to the Throne,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A presage falls upon thee, as a ray</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Straight from the Judge, expressive of thy lot.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That calm and joy uprising in thy soul</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is first-fruit to thee of thy recompense,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And heaven begun.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</section>
			<section id="the-dream-of-gerontius-4" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">§</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">4</span>
				</h3>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Soul</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i10">But hark! upon my sense</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Comes a fierce hubbub, which would make me fear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Could I be frighted.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i10">We are now arrived</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Close on the judgment court; that sullen howl</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is from the demons who assemble there.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It is the middle region, where of old</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Satan appeared among the sons of God,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To cast his jibes and scoffs at holy Job.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So now his legions throng the vestibule,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hungry and wild, to claim their property,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And gather souls for hell. Hist to their cry.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Soul</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>How sour and how uncouth a dissonance!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Demons</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Low-born clods<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-33" id="noteref-33" epub:type="noteref">33</a></span>
						<span class="i2">Of brute earth,</span>
						<span class="i4">They aspire</span>
						<span>To become gods,</span>
						<span class="i2">By a new birth,</span>
						<span>And an extra grace,</span>
						<span class="i2">And a score of merits.</span>
						<span class="i7">As if aught</span>
						<span>Could stand in place</span>
						<span class="i7">Of the high thought,</span>
						<span class="i5">And the glance of fire</span>
						<span class="i2">Of the great spirits,</span>
						<span>The powers blest,</span>
						<span class="i2">The lords by right,</span>
						<span class="i5">The primal owners,</span>
						<span class="i7">Of the proud dwelling</span>
						<span class="i2">And realm of light⁠—</span>
						<span>Dispossessed,</span>
						<span>Aside thrust,</span>
						<span class="i10">Chucked down,</span>
						<span class="i2">By the sheer might</span>
						<span class="i4">Of a despot’s will,</span>
						<span class="i11">Of a tyrant’s frown.</span>
						<span class="i8">Who after expelling</span>
						<span class="i8">Their hosts, gave,</span>
						<span class="i4">Triumphant still,</span>
						<span>And still unjust,</span>
						<span class="i11">Each forfeit crown</span>
						<span class="i6">To psalm-droners,</span>
						<span class="i6">And canting groaners,</span>
						<span class="i8">To every slave,</span>
						<span class="i6">And pious cheat,</span>
						<span class="i8">And crawling knave,</span>
						<span>Who licked the dust</span>
						<span class="i10">Under his feet.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>It is the restless panting of their being;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like beasts of prey, who, caged within their bars,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In a deep hideous purring have their life,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And an incessant pacing to and fro.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Demons</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>The mind bold</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And independent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">The purpose free,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">So we are told,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Must not think</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">To have the ascendant.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i8">What’s a saint?</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">One whose breath</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i6">Doth the air taint</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Before his death;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i6">A bundle of bones,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Which fools adore,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i8">Ha! ha!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">When life is o’er,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which rattle and stink,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">E’en in the flesh.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We cry his pardon!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">No flesh hath he;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i6">Ha! ha!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">For it hath died,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">’Tis crucified</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Day by day,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Afresh, afresh,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i6">Ha! ha!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">That holy clay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i8">Ha! ha!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This gains guerdon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">So priestlings prate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i7">Ha! ha!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before the Judge,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i6">And pleads and atones</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For spite and grudge,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i6">And bigot mood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i3">And envy and hate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i6">And greed of blood.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Soul</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>How impotent they are! and yet on earth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They have repute for wondrous power and skill;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And books describe, how that the very face</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of the Evil One, if seen, would have a force</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Even to freeze the blood, and choke the life</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of him who saw it.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i10">In thy trial-state</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou hadst a traitor nestling close at home,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Connatural, who with the powers of hell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was leagued, and of thy senses kept the keys,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And to that deadliest foe unlocked thy heart.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And therefore is it, in respect to man,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Those fallen ones show so majestical.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But, when some child of grace, angel or saint,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pure and upright in his integrity</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of nature, meets the demons on their raid,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They scud away as cowards from the fight.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nay, oft hath holy hermit in his cell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not yet disburdened of mortality,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mocked at their threats and warlike overtures;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or, dying, when they swarmed, like flies, around,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Defied them, and departed to his Judge.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Demons</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Virtue and vice,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">A knave’s pretence.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">’Tis all the same;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Ha! ha!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i6">Dread of hell-fire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Of the venomous flame,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i8">A coward’s plea.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Give him his price,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i8">Saint though he be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ha! ha!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">From shrewd good sense</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i6">He’ll slave for hire;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">Ha! ha!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i6">And does but aspire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To the heaven above</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i4">With sordid aim,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And not from love.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i6">Ha! ha!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Soul</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I see not those false spirits; shall I see</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My dearest Master, when I reach His throne;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or hear, at least, His awful judgment-word</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With personal intonation, as I now</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hear thee, not see thee, Angel? Hitherto</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All has been darkness since I left the earth;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall I remain thus sight bereft all through</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My penance time? If so, how comes it then</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That I have hearing still, and taste, and touch,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet not a glimmer of that princely sense</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which binds ideas in one, and makes them live?</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Nor touch, nor taste, nor hearing hast thou now;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou livest in a world of signs and types,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The presentations of most holy truths,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Living and strong, which now encompass thee.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A disembodied soul, thou hast by right</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No converse with aught else beside thyself;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But, lest so stern a solitude should load</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And break thy being, in mercy are vouchsafed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some lower measures of perception,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which seem to thee, as though through channels brought,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through ear, or nerves, or palate, which are gone.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thou art wrapped and swathed around in dreams,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dreams that are true, yet enigmatical;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For the belongings of thy present state,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Save through such symbols, come not home to thee.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thus thou tell’st of space, and time, and size,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of fragrant, solid, bitter, musical,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of fire, and of refreshment after fire;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As (let me use similitude of earth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To aid thee in the knowledge thou dost ask)⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As ice which blisters may be said to burn.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor hast thou now extension,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-34" id="noteref-34" epub:type="noteref">34</a> with its parts</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Correlative⁠—long habit cozens thee⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor power to move thyself, nor limbs to move.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hast thou not heard of those, who, after loss</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of hand or foot, still cried that they had pains</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In hand or foot, as though they had it still?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So is it now with thee, who hast not lost</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy hand or foot, but all which made up man;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So will it be, until the joyous day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of resurrection, when thou wilt regain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All thou hast lost, new-made and glorified.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How, even now, the consummated Saints</span>
						<br/>
						<span>See God in heaven, I may not explicate.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Meanwhile let it suffice thee to possess</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such means of converse as are granted thee,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though, till that Beatific Vision thou art blind;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For e’en thy purgatory, which comes like fire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is fire without its light.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Soul</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i12">His will be done!</span>
						<span>I am not worthy e’er to see again</span>
						<span>The face of day; far less His countenance</span>
						<span>Who is the very sun. Nathless, in life,</span>
						<span>When I looked forward to my purgatory,</span>
						<span>It ever was my solace to believe,</span>
						<span>That, ere I plunged amid th’ avenging flame,</span>
						<span>I had one sight of Him to strengthen me.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Nor rash nor vain is that presentiment;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yes⁠—for one moment thou shalt see thy Lord.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thus will it be: what time thou art arraigned</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before the dread tribunal, and thy lot</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is cast for ever, should it be to sit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On His right hand among His pure elect,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then sight, or that which to the soul is sight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As by a lightning-flash, will come to thee,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thou shalt see, amid the dark profound,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whom thy soul loveth, and would fain approach⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>One moment; but thou knowest not, my child,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What thou dost ask: that sight of the Most Fair</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will gladden thee, but it will pierce thee too.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Soul</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Thou speakest darkly, Angel! and an awe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Falls on me, and a fear lest I be rash.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>There was a mortal, who is now above</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In the mid glory: he, when near to die,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was given communion with the Crucified⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such, that the Master’s very wounds were stamped</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon his flesh;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-35" id="noteref-35" epub:type="noteref">35</a> and, from the agony</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which thrilled through body and soul in that embrace</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Learn that the flame of the Everlasting Love</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Doth burn ere it transform.⁠ ⁠…</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</section>
			<section id="the-dream-of-gerontius-5" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">§</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">5</span>
				</h3>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span class="i12">… Hark to those sounds!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They come of tender beings angelical,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Least and most childlike of the sons of God.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">First Choir of Angelicals</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Praise to the Holiest in the height,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-36" id="noteref-36" epub:type="noteref">36</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And in the depth be praise:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In all His words most wonderful;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Most sure in all His ways!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To us His elder race He gave</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To battle and to win,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Without the chastisement of pain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Without the soil of sin.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The younger son He willed to be</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A marvel in his birth:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Spirit and flesh his parents were;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">His home was heaven and earth.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The Eternal blessed His child, and armed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And sent him hence afar,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To serve as champion in the field</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of elemental war.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To be His Viceroy in the world</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of matter, and of sense;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon the frontier, towards the foe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A resolute defence.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>We now have passed the gate, and are within</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The House of Judgment; and whereas on earth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Temples and palaces are formed of parts</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Costly and rare, but all material,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So in the world of spirits nought is found,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To mould withal and form into a whole,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But what is immaterial; and thus</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The smallest portions of this edifice,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cornice, or frieze, or balustrade, or stair,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The very pavement is made up of life⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of holy, blessed, and immortal beings,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who hymn their Maker’s praise continually.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Choir of Angelicals</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Praise to the Holiest in the height,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And in the depth be praise:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In all His words most wonderful;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Most sure in all His ways!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Woe to thee, man! for he was found</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A recreant in the fight;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And lost his heritage of heaven,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And fellowship with light.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Above him now the angry sky,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Around the tempest’s din;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who once had angels for his friends,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Had but the brutes for kin.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>O man! a savage kindred they;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To flee that monster brood</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He scaled the seaside cave, and clomb</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The giants of the wood.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>With now a fear, and now a hope,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With aids which chance supplied,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From youth to eld, from sire to son,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">He lived, and toiled, and died.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>He dreed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-37" id="noteref-37" epub:type="noteref">37</a> his penance age by age;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And step by step began</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Slowly to doff his savage garb,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And be again a man.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And quickened by the Almighty’s breath,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And chastened by His rod,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And taught by Angel-visitings,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">At length he sought his God:</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And learned to call upon His name,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And in His faith create</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A household and a fatherland,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A city and a state.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Glory to Him who from the mire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In patient length of days,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Elaborated into life</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A people to His praise!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Soul</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>The sound is like the rushing of the wind⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Summer wind among the lofty pines;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Swelling and dying, echoing round about,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now here, now distant, wild and beautiful;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While, scattered from the branches it has stirred,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Descend ecstatic odours.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Third Choir of Angelicals</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Praise to the Holiest in the height,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And in the depth be praise:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In all His words most wonderful;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Most sure in all His ways!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The Angels, as beseemingly</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To spirit-kind was given,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At once were tried and perfected,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And took their seats in heaven.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>For them no twilight or eclipse;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">No growth and no decay:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Twas hopeless, all-ingulfing night,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Or beatific day.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>But to the younger race there rose</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A hope upon its fall;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And slowly, surely, gracefully,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The morning dawned on all.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And ages, opening out, divide</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The precious and the base,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And from the hard and sullen mass,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Mature the heirs of grace.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>O man! albeit the quickening ray,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Lit from his second birth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Makes him at length what once he was,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And heaven grows out of earth;</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Yet still between that earth and heaven⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">His journey and his goal⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A double agony awaits</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">His body and his soul.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>A double debt he has to pay⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The forfeit of his sins,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The chill of death is past, and now</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The penance-fire begins.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Glory to Him, who evermore</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">By truth and justice reigns;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who tears the soul from out its case,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And burns away its stains!</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>They sing of thy approaching agony,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which thou so eagerly didst question of:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It is the face of the Incarnate God</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall smite thee with that keen and subtle pain;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And yet the memory which it leaves will be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A sovereign febrifuge to heal the wound;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And yet withal it will the wound provoke,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And aggravate and widen it the more.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Soul</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Thou speakest mysteries; still methinks I know</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To disengage the tangle of thy words:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet rather would I hear thy angel voice,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than for myself be thy interpreter.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>When then⁠—if such thy lot⁠—thou seest thy Judge,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The sight of Him will kindle in thy heart,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All tender, gracious, reverential thoughts.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou wilt be sick with love, and yearn for Him,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And feel as though thou couldst but pity Him,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That one so sweet should e’er have placed Himself</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At disadvantage such, as to be used</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So vilely by a being so vile as thee.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There is a pleading in His pensive eyes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will pierce thee to the quick, and trouble thee.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thou wilt hate and loathe thyself; for, though</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now sinless, thou wilt feel that thou hast sinned,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As never thou didst feel; and wilt desire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To slink away, and hide thee from His sight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And yet wilt have a longing aye to dwell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Within the beauty of His countenance.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And these two pains, so counter and so keen⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The longing for Him, when thou seest Him not;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The shame of self at thought of seeing Him⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will be thy veriest, sharpest purgatory.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Soul</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>My soul is in my hand: I have no fear⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In His dear might prepared for weal or woe.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But hark! a grand mysterious harmony:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It floods me, like the deep and solemn sound</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of many waters.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i8">We have gained the stairs</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which rise towards the Presence-chamber; there</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A band of mighty Angels keep the way</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On either side, and hymn the Incarnate God.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Angels of the Sacred Stair</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Father, whose goodness none can know, but they</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i3">Who see Thee face to face,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By man hath come the infinite display</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i3">Of Thy victorious grace;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But fallen man⁠—the creature of a day⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i3">Skills not that love to trace.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It needs, to tell the triumph Thou hast wrought,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>An Angel’s deathless fire, an Angel’s reach of thought.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>It needs that very Angel, who with awe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i3">Amid the garden shade,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The great Creator in His sickness saw,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i3">Soothed by a creature’s aid,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And agonised, as victim of the Law</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i3">Which He Himself had made;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For who can praise Him in His depth and height,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But he who saw Him reel amid that solitary fight?</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Soul</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Hark! for the lintels of the presence-gate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are vibrating and echoing back the strain.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Fourth Choir of Angelicals</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Praise to the Holiest in the height,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And in the depth be praise:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In all His words most wonderful;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Most sure in all His ways!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The foe blasphemed the Holy Lord,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">As if He reckoned ill,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In that He placed His puppet man</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The frontier place to fill.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>For even in his best estate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With amplest gifts endued,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A sorry sentinel was he,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A being of flesh and blood.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>As though a thing, who for his help</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Must needs possess a wife,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Could cope with those proud rebel hosts,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Who had angelic life.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And when, by blandishment of Eve,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That earth-born Adam fell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He shrieked in triumph, and he cried,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">“A sorry sentinel;</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The Maker by His word is bound,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Escape or cure is none;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He must abandon to his doom,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And slay His darling son.”</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>And now the threshold, as we traverse it,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Utters aloud its glad responsive chant.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Fifth Choir of Angelicals</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Praise to the Holiest in the height,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And in the depth be praise:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In all His words most wonderful;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Most sure in all His ways!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>O loving wisdom of our God!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">When all was sin and shame,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A second Adam to the fight</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And to the rescue came.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>O wisest love! that flesh and blood</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Which did in Adam fail,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Should strive afresh against the foe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Should strive and should prevail;</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And that a higher gift than grace</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Should flesh and blood refine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>God’s Presence and His very Self,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And Essence all divine.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>O generous love! that He who smote</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In man for man the foe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The double agony in man</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">For man should undergo;</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And in the garden secretly,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And on the cross on high,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Should teach His brethren and inspire</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To suffer and to die.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</section>
			<section id="the-dream-of-gerontius-6" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">§</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">6</span>
				</h3>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Thy judgment now is near, for we are come</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into the veiled presence of our God.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Soul</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I hear the voices that I left on earth.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>It is the voice of friends around thy bed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who say the “<span xml:lang="la">Subvenite</span>” with the priest.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hither the echoes come; before the Throne</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stands the great Angel of the Agony,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The same who strengthened Him, what time He knelt</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lone in the garden shade, bedewed with blood.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That Angel best can plead with Him for all</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tormented souls, the dying and the dead.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel of the Agony</b><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-38" id="noteref-38" epub:type="noteref">38</a>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Jesu! by that shuddering dread which fell on Thee;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Jesu! by that cold dismay which sickened Thee;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Jesu! by that pang of heart which thrilled in Thee;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Jesu! by that mount of sins which crippled Thee;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Jesu! by that sense of guilt which stifled Thee;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Jesu! by that innocence which girdled Thee;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Jesu! by that sanctity which reigned in Thee;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Jesu! by that Godhead which was one with Thee;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Jesu! spare these souls which are so dear to Thee,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who in prison, calm and patient, wait for Thee;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hasten, Lord, their hour, and bid them come to Thee,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To that glorious Home, where they shall ever gaze on Thee.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Soul</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I go before my Judge. Ah!⁠ ⁠…</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span class="i12">… Praise to His Name!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The eager spirit has darted from my hold,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, with the intemperate energy of love,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Flies to the dear feet of Emmanuel;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But, ere it reach them, the keen sanctity,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which with its effluence, like a glory, clothes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And circles round the Crucified, has seized,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And scorched, and shrivelled it; and now it lies</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Passive and still before the awful Throne.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O happy, suffering soul! for it is safe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Consumed, yet quickened, by the glance of God.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Soul</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Take me away,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-39" id="noteref-39" epub:type="noteref">39</a> and in the lowest deep</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i3">There let me be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And there in hope the lone night-watches keep,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i3">Told out for me.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There, motionless and happy in my pain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i3">Lone, not forlorn⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There will I sing my sad perpetual strain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i3">Until the morn.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There will I sing, and soothe my stricken breast,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i3">Which ne’er can cease</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To throb, and pine, and languish, till possest</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i3">Of its Sole Peace.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There will I sing my absent Lord and Love:⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i3">Take me away,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That sooner I may rise, and go above,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And see Him in the truth of everlasting day.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</section>
			<section id="the-dream-of-gerontius-7" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">§</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">7</span>
				</h3>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Now let the golden prison ope its gates,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Making sweet music, as each fold revolves</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon its ready hinge. And ye great powers,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Angels of Purgatory, receive from me</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My charge, a precious soul, until the day,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When, from all bond and forfeiture released,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I shall reclaim it for the courts of light.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Souls in Purgatory</b><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-40" id="noteref-40" epub:type="noteref">40</a>
						</p>
					</header>
					<ol>
						<li>
							<p>Lord, Thou hast been our refuge: in every generation;</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Before the hills were born, and the world was: from age to age Thou art God.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Bring us not, Lord, very low: for Thou hast said, Come back again, ye sons of Adam.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>A thousand years before Thine eyes are but as yesterday: and as a watch of the night which is come and gone.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>The grass springs up in the morning: at evening-tide it shrivels up and dies.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>So we fail in Thine anger: and in Thy wrath we are troubled.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Thou hast set our sins in Thy sight: and our round of days in the light of Thy countenance.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Come back, O Lord! how long: and be entreated for Thy servants.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>In Thy morning we shall be filled with Thy mercy: we shall rejoice and be in pleasure all our days.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>We shall be glad according to the days of our humiliation: and the years in which we have seen evil.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Look, O Lord, upon Thy servants and on Thy work: and direct their children.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>And let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us: and the work of our hands, establish Thou it.</p>
						</li>
					</ol>
					<p>
						<span>Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the Holy Ghost.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b epub:type="z3998:persona">Angel</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Softly and gently, dearly-ransomed soul,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-41" id="noteref-41" epub:type="noteref">41</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">In my most loving arms I now enfold thee,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, o’er the penal waters, as they roll,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">I poise thee, and I lower thee, and hold thee.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And carefully I dip thee in the lake,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-42" id="noteref-42" epub:type="noteref">42</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And thou, without a sob or a resistance,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dost through the flood thy rapid passage take,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Sinking deep, deeper into the dim distance.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Angels, to whom the willing task is given,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Shall tend, and nurse, and lull thee, as thou liest;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Masses on the earth, and prayers in heaven,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Shall aid thee at the Throne of the Most Highest.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Farewell, but not for ever! brother dear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Be brave and patient on thy bed of sorrow;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Swiftly shall pass thy night of trial here,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And I will come and wake thee on the morrow.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</section>
			<footer>
				<p><em>The Oratory</em>. <time datetime="1865-01"><em>January</em>, 1865.</time></p>
			</footer>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
